Airlines plan insurance firm New York TimesMarch 03, 2002 The nation's major airlines, with the support of the Bush administration, have agreed to create their own insurance company to cover themselves against terrorist attacks.Under the plan, which the airlines approved Thursday, the government would continue to provide subsidized coverage for especially large losses. Provided there are no major attacks, the new insurance company's role would grow over time and the government's role would further diminish.The airline industry is the first that has started an insurance company to resist the sharp price increases and reductions in coverage imposed by traditional insurers since the September terrorist attacks. The insurers lost an estimated $50 billion.The plan has the government's backing. "We are in agreement in principle with the airlines," said Chet Lunner, a spokesman for Norman Mineta, secretary of Transportation.By having their own insurer, the airlines expect to save hundreds of millions of dollars a year, which would help to keep airfares from rising. But commercial insurers protest that the government assistance is denying business to them.The new company will be set up in Vermont, whose regulations have made it the preferred home for insurance companies created by corporations and industry groups.Once Vermont officials approve the business plan for the new company, to be known as Equitime, and regulators in the 49 other states have been notified, the participating airlines would be required to put up a total of about $50 million in seed money.The new company would provide as much as $300 million in coverage and, through it, the airlines would buy as much as $2 billion in additional coverage from the government. The new coverage would also be broader, covering passengers as well as damage to people, buildings and other property on the ground. The airlines have separate coverage for their aircraft.	 News onTough choices on steel imports Bush decision could change House controlBy Steven Pearlstein and Mike AllenWashington PostMarch 03, 2002 WASHINGTON - If the president does too little, he could trigger another round of steel company bankruptcies and layoffs, jeopardize passage of free-trade legislation, sacrifice control of the House of Representatives, and perhaps endanger his prospects for re-election in 2004.On the other hand, if he does too much, it could cause a trade war with Europe, create budget-busting entitlements for U.S. workers, jeopardize jobs in steel-using companies and invite other industries to demand similar trade barriers and government bailouts.And if, as aides indicate, President Bush goes with a Solomonic compromise, he may not please anybody while failing to achieve his goal of securing a sustainable future for the beleaguered steel industry.Deadline is loomingWednesday is the deadline for Bush to decide what steps, if any, the government will take to stem the flow of foreign steel into the country. Cabinet members, including Vice President Dick Cheney, have met eight times on the issue, including a session Tuesday. Dozens of sub-Cabinet meetings also have been held. Two of the president's top political advisers have run a steady stream of meetings with business and union leaders and key members of Congress. The topic is so politically sensitive that no official has been willing to discuss it publicly.Administration sources said no decision has been made.The administration's effort to save the U.S. steel industry was launched in June when Bush asked the International Trade Commission to determine whether a surge in imports had seriously damaged the U.S. industry.At the same time, he ordered trade officials to launch negotiations with foreign governments aimed at eliminating trade barriers and government subsidies that have generated a global oversupply.Industry officials hoped the ITC process would lead to substantial tariffs on steel imports that would raise domestic steel prices from their lowest levels in 20 years while giving the industry the financial breathing room to consolidate into fewer, larger and more modern producers. In the past three years, 31 steel companies filed for bankruptcy protection. The steelworkers union looked to the White House initiative as the only hope to forestall another round of the layoffs, plant closings and bankruptcies that have cut their ranks by 20,000 since 1997 and threatened retirement benefits for more than a half-million retirees.The president and his advisers saw in the steel initiative a chance to boost GOP strength among union households while realigning the politics of steel-sensitive swing states.House hangs in balancePolitical strategists calculate that as many as six House seats in this year's elections, the number it would take for Republicans to keep control of the chamber, hinge on the fallout from the steel decision."These seats could put Dick Gephardt in the speaker's chair," said Howard Wolfson, executive director of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.For Bush, the Steel Belt provides a crucial battleground for his re-election. The White House hopes he can make inroads in Pennsylvania, where his loss by 5 percentage points to Vice President Al Gore was one of his bitterest disappointments of the 2000 race, while holding on to Ohio, which he won by a similar margin. But perhaps no state better demonstrates the importance of the steel issue than West Virginia, where promises to protect the industry allowed Bush to score a crucial upset in 2000.As recently as December, it looked like all the pieces for a successful steel initiative were falling into place.The ITC, having found that the U.S. industry had suffered serious injury from imports, recommended that Bush impose some combination of import quotas and tariffs ranging from 15 percent to 40 percent, depending on the type of steel.In negotiations in Paris, major steel-producing countries identified more than 100 million tons of annual steel production scheduled to be retired by 2005, or about half of the global overcapacity problem.At home, U.S. Steel, the largest and most profitable of the surviving steelmakers, boldly proposed buying Bethlehem Steel and as many as three other rivals, if the government agreed to assume some of the health care and pension obligations to the companies' retirees. The proposal had the blessing of the steelworkers union, which agreed to help finance the deal by accepting more flexible work rules and reductions in benefits.Snags begin to ariseMore recently, however, the plan to save the industry began to unravel.Facing the prospect of tariffs that could raise domestic steel prices by as much as 10 percent, steel-consuming industries - makers of tractors, washing machines, airplane fasteners and auto parts - launched a lobbying counteroffensive, arguing that they would lose sales if they were forced to pay more than foreign competitors for steel. Last week, port directors and shipping companies from around the country descended on the Capitol, arguing that thousands of jobs in their sector are at stake if steel imports dry up.Though there is argument over how many jobs will be saved or lost, there is no debate that a 40 percent tariff on steel would create a sizable pool of winners and losers. Eight members of the Senate, including Louisiana's John Breaux, a moderate Democrat, and GOP Leader Trent Lott of Mississippi wrote Bush last week urging him to avoid "prohibitive" tariffs or quotas. Reflecting the Republican House leaders' view, Speaker Dennis Hastert of Illinois told his local newspaper he's against any tariffs or quotas.Weighing in on the opposite side, however, are several Republican congressmen from steel-producing districts who cast difficult and ultimately deciding votes last December to give the president authority to submit new trade treaties to an up-or-down vote in Congress, called trade promotion authority. They warned the White House they might have to abandon Bush on the next vote if he fails to provide sufficient help to steel communities to make the transition to a free-trade environment.