PHOENIX: 61 More Weather 		 Chinese open to U.S Restaurants, shops gaining wide approvalBy Elisabeth Elisabeth cq RosenthalNew York TimesMarch 03, 2002 BEIJING - Du Yun maneuvered the large shopping cart into PriceSmart's parking lot, where she popped open the trunk of her Buick and filled it with groceries."I come here once a week, sometimes twice, it's so convenient," said Du, an actress. "There was nothing like this in China in the past."Du, 29, likes to cook traditional Chinese food, but with her 6-year-old niece visiting, they will probably go to KFC. For anniversaries, she and her husband favor T.G.I. Friday'sCommon ground foundDuring President Bush's visit to Beijing recently, leaders of these two powerful nations were politely at odds on many issues. But people in China's cities have found much common ground with Americans, with the way they live converging rapidly in the marketplace.In the past few years, China's major cities have sprouted American stores and restaurants at prodigious rates, including Starbucks, PriceSmart, Pizza Hut and McDonald's. New housing complexes bear names like Orange County and Manhattan Gardens. A high-end Buick is a sought-after luxury car.Europeans may view every Big Mac as a terrifying sign of American cultural imperialism, but Chinese have mostly welcomed the invasion.In one recent survey, nearly half of all Chinese younger than 12 identified McDonald's as a domestic brand, according to Beijing's Horizon Market Research. Like a seed falling on fertile soil, each new Western chain store seems to generate a group of slightly cheaper domestic clones nearby."Chinese people these days have a very positive impression of American commercial culture and popular culture," said Victor Yuan, president of Horizon. "American products have been . . . a kind of commercial diplomacy."It is in some ways an odd affection, given that most Chinese remain distrustful of the U.S. government, seeing it as something of a bully. Several years ago there was a spate of newspaper commentaries suggesting that China should develop its own fast-food products to defeat the intruders. But such views are rarely heard today, and the numbers speak for themselves.Skyrocketing numbersThere are now 80 McDonald's in Beijing alone.The number of Kentucky Fried Chicken outlets in China has risen 100 a year for the past two years, to about 600.Shanghai and Beijing each have more than two dozen Starbucks. Most Chinese never drank coffee until Starbucks came to town, selling small lattes for more than $2.PriceSmart, which opened its first store here in 1997, now has 18 and plans to have 70 by the end of next year. "My daughter, who's 16, wants to go to the U.S.," Gao Fugui, 45, said. "But for me there's no point. I have basically the same life here." "Comparing life 10 years ago to now is like heaven and earth," he said. "The quality of life has improved, the country's improved, even people's ideas have changed."A decade ago no one would have predicted that leisure for China's emerging urban middle class would have such an American texture. There are hip bars for evening; shopping malls and miniature golf for daytime; ski resorts for winter; water parks for summer.U.S. products are hot"I like American products, especially clothes and cosmetics; I really follow the styles," said Jiang Sha, 24.Jiang said she eats Western fast food many times each week: "It's simple and fast, suited to my lifestyle."In the 1980s, companies from other Asian countries were far better poised to enter the huge Chinese market, Yuan said; they shared a culture and, in the case of Taiwan, a language. But, he said, the Western companies did a far better job of getting to know the rapidly changing tastes of the Chinese consumer, even picking local names with great care.Western products and stores have gained a reputation for high quality and good service, Yuan said. But he added that in some ways the products were beside the point."The Americans here are selling not just products but a culture," Yuan said, "and it is a culture that many Chinese want. They're saying, 'If you buy this, it will pull you into a new kind of life.' "While the Western chains are thriving, it is often the lightning-fast emergence of Chinese-owned copycat stores that has really spread lifestyle changes to the masses. These stores tend to cater to Chinese who cannot afford the imports.Attacks in India widening as toll nears 400 dead Hindus, Muslims persist in violenceNEW DELHI, India - As the death toll from four days of Hindu-Muslim violence approached 400 on Saturday, officials said the murderous attacks were spreading from cities in the riot-prone western state of Gujarat to villages that are usually untouched by deadly religious strife, and difficult to police. "It's never been like this before," the state's most senior civil servant said. "It's the first time I've seen violence like this in rural areas. This is very worrisome. You just cannot access security forces to each and every village. Gujarat has 18,000 villages."In Sardarpur village, Hindus attacked a Muslim hamlet on Friday night, surrounding a cluster of houses, blocking off escape routes and burning 27 Muslims to death.Nine people traveling together on Saturday were set upon and eight of them were killed in Lambadiya, a village in the same district where a crowd of Muslims set fire to a train carrying Hindu activists on Wednesday.That gruesome crime, which killed 58 people, has set off a spasm of retaliatory attacks by Hindus on Muslims. The state government and the state and local police have been harshly criticized for failing to stop the rioters.The state's chief minister, Narendra Modi, has repeatedly tried to assure the public in recent days that only a small portion of the state is beset by violence, while most is at peace.India's prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee, is from the same Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party as Modi. He did not try to put a positive spin on the situation on Saturday."The burning alive of people, including women and children, from Godhra to Ahmadabad and other places is a blot on the country's face," he said.As the government tries to control the spreading of violence, officials increased the number of cities and towns under curfew to 50 on Saturday.More than 4,000 soldiers and other security forces from the central government have arrived in the state to reinforce the police.The number of people killed by the police has risen to 49, a sign that constables and officers are following directives that empower them to use deadly force to quell the violence.The killings were originally most widespread in Ahmadabad, a city of 3.5 million, and have certainly not ceased there, though only five of the 30 or so people killed Saturday died there. Attacks are still occurring when the opportunity arises in Ahmadabad and other cities, stirring fear.Three Muslims traveling together on a train Saturday climbed down when it stopped on the tracks closer to their destination in Ahmadabad. They were killed as they walked through a field to reach the house, officials said.In the city of Baroda, Hindus burned down a bakery, incinerating seven Muslim workers inside it, said Bhagesh Jha, the senior administrator in the district."The situation is under control. The town is under curfew. The army is on the roads," he insisted.