 Cheney finds resistance toward war expansion AMMAN, Jordan - Vice President Dick Cheney received a public warning Tuesday from Jordanian King Abdullah II that expanding the terrorism war to Iraq could destabilize the region and undermine gains in Afghanistan.U.S. officials had hoped for a more muted message from the king, whose comments came as Cheney began a whirlwind tour of the Middle East.Abdullah has been a top ally in the terror war; but like many Arab leaders, he has been openly skeptical of U.S. hints of hostile action against Iraq.During a private meeting with Cheney, Abdullah "expressed hope for a solution to all outstanding problems with Iraq through dialogue and peaceful means," a palace statement said.It also said Abdullah voiced Jordan's concern about "the repercussions of any possible strike on Iraq and the dangers of that on the stability and security of the region."The meeting with the king was the vice president's first stop on a tour of nine Arab nations, Israel and Turkey."Here, and throughout this journey, I expect frank discussions on the urgent matters facing this region and all of the civilized world," Cheney said at an airport ceremony.He then was whisked away to the private meeting and working dinner with the king at Beit al-Barakeh palace. During the meeting, Cheney stressed the importance of having U.N. weapons inspectors return to Iraq and said the inspections must be "wide open, robust, everywhere, anywhere, anytime," Cheney spokeswoman Jennifer Millerwise said.She also said that the king and Cheney agreed a maximum effort must be made to get both Palestinians and Israelis back to the table in the Middle East peace process."As President Bush made clear last week, the United States will do all it can to help end the tragic violence between the Palestinians and the Israelis, and return the parties to a productive negotiating process," Cheney said.He will meet later in the week, in Israel, with State Department envoy Anthony Zinni, whom Bush has sent to the region to try to get the peace process moving again.Abdullah set an opening-day tone for Cheney's trip with a warning about U.S. military action against Iraq.The United Nations "is the only way to resolve all outstanding issues," Abdullah said in an interview with the Saudi Al-Watan newspaper. He also spoke of ending "the sanctions on brotherly Iraq."The remarks were carried by Jordan's official Petra news agency shortly before Cheney's arrival.Bush administration officials have suggested that much of the recent rhetoric from Arab states is for domestic consumption. Jordan, for instance, has a large Palestinian population and borders Iraq.U.S. officials hope that they can at least win private assurances from Arab leaders that they will not attempt to stand in the way of possible military strikes.Cheney was welcomed at the airport by Jordan's prime minister, Ali Abul-Ragheb, who suggested that spiraling Israeli-Palestinian violence is one of the most urgent issues affecting the region and hoped that the Cheney visit could help in "getting the process of peace back on track."Arab nations want the United States to take a more active role, primarily by putting more pressure on Israel.The palace statement issued late Tuesday by Jordan said that the king reviewed the "tense situation in the Palestinian territories."Abdullah expressed hope that Zinni's mission will "succeed in salvaging the situation and enforcing a cease-fire."Cheney came to Jordan after a stop in London, where British Prime Minister Tony Blair voiced strong support for widening the terror war.SHARM EL SHEIKH, Egypt - Vice President Dick Cheney pressed for an end to the deadly tumult between Israel and the Palestinians on Wednesday as frantic diplomatic efforts intensified around the world to keep the region from sliding into outright war."I think the burden is on both parties to bring an end to the violence," Cheney said in an appearance with Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. "We plan to do everything we can to persuade the parties that it's time for violence to end."Cheney's declaration of a U.S. commitment to try to end the bloodshed in the Mideast was echoed around the world. From the White House to the United Nations to the Vatican, efforts were under way to salvage the mission of U.S. envoy Anthony Zinni, who is scheduled to arrive in the region today."We are in the most critical situation in more than 10 years," said Terje Roed-Larsen, the U.N. special coordinator for the Middle East, in Jerusalem. "The carnage is horrifying. We are inside the abyss."The Bush administration also is concerned that Cheney's 10-day tour of nine Arab nations will be consumed by Middle East turmoil. Cheney's priority is to consult about U.S. plans to force Iraq's Saddam Hussein from power.Seeking to avert a U.S. military attack on Iraq, Mubarak said Wednesday that he would press Iraq's president to readmit U.N. weapons inspectors and that he had received indications that Baghdad would agree."We'll try hard with Saddam Hussein to accept the U.N. inspectors to go there," Mubarak said at a news conference in Egypt with Cheney, "and we are going to meet with some of his special envoys and tell them that this is a must. My knowledge is that he's going to accept the inspectors."On the military front Wednesday in the Mideast, Israel kept up its offensive against the Palestinians, as tanks and troops encircled Ramallah. Israel sent tanks down the avenues leading into Ramallah's central Manara Square but skirted the compound where Palestinian Authority President Yasser Arafat has headquarters.Israeli helicopter gunships fired on targets in the city, and tanks shelled an area where Palestinian gunmen were operating. Israeli troops took up positions in schools and homes and conducted searches in the nearby Al Amari refugee camp for a second day.In one exchange in Ramallah, Fuad Obeidy, deputy commander of the Palestinian security service Force 17, was killed by Israeli tank fire, doctors said. An Israeli soldier was also killed.Italian free-lance photographer Raffaele Ciriello, 42, was killed near Manara Square, the first foreign journalist killed since the fighting broke out in September 2000. An army spokesman, Lt. Col. Olivier Rafowicz, expressed regret at the death but declined to discuss it without more information.Early this morning, the tanks began withdrawing from Ramallah and Al Amari.The Israeli action was a continuation of its 2-week-old military offensive; Lt. Gen. Shaul Mofaz told a parliamentary committee that about 20,000 Israeli soldiers are stationed in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.Tuesday, 31 Palestinians were killed in the West Bank, the most in one day since Israel seized the territory in 1967.In other developments:¥  Palestinians cautiously welcomed a U.N. Security Council resolution endorsing a Palestinian state. Israel praised elements of the measure, but refrained from commenting directly on the statehood issue.¥ Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon rejected myriad calls for restraint and pressed ahead with his nation's largest military operation in three decades. But in a stormy Cabinet session, Defense Minister Binyamin Ben-Eliezer threatened to resign over how to conduct military operations, Israeli media reported.¥  From the Vatican, Pope John Paul II said, "We are all saddened by the daily instances of violence and death."