Shuttle problem fails to deter Hubble mission 03, 2002 HOUSTON - After some fast-paced trouble-shooting, NASA concluded Saturday that a cooling-system blockage aboard the shuttle Columbia was not serious enough to warrant an early end to the Hubble Space Telescope overhaul mission.The problem surfaced shortly after Columbia and its seven-member crew lifted off Friday on the 11-day mission.A small piece of debris, perhaps dislodged by the violent launch, became trapped in a coolant loop in one of two radiator systems that chill vital electronic gear.The blockage degraded the fluid flow in one of the systems, prompting mission managers to consider calling the shuttle crew back to Earth before the second cooling system encountered a similar problem.After a round-the-clock assessment by several groups of engineering experts, Columbia's mission-management team concluded Saturday that such a drastic action was unnecessary."The team unanimously felt confident we can press forward on the mission with no risk, that we will be able to complete the mission as planned," said NASA's Ron Dittmore, shuttle program manager.Columbia was on course to rendezvous with the 362-mile-high space telescope early today.Using the shuttle's robot arm, astronaut Nancy Currie carefully was expected to grab the $7 billion observatory and hoist it into the payload bay. During a series of five spacewalks scheduled to begin early Monday, astronaut mechanics plan to overhaul the 12-year-old telescope's electrical power system, replace a faulty pointing device, install a powerful new camera and equip a second imager with a new chiller.Experts monitoring from Mission Control spotted a drop in the Freon flow rate in one of the two radiators as Columbia completed an otherwise picture-perfect climb to orbit.Positioned on the underside of the payload bay doors, the two radiators cast off heat generated by electronics responsible for power, life support, communications, guidance and hydraulic systems.The cooling apparatus is designed so that either radiator can cool the spacecraft during the launching and landing phases of a mission, when the heating is most intense. Under NASA's flight rules, a mission should end as soon as possible if one of the cooling systems fails.By Saturday, the flow rate in the degraded Freon system was holding steady at just over 200 pounds per hour, about two-thirds the usual rate. After a reappraisal, shuttle managers concluded the lower flow rate was adequate."It would be a foolish waste of NASA's resources and the government's investment for us to arbitrarily decide to come home out of conservatism if we can see our way clear with good engineering rationale to continue to fly," said NASA's Phil Engelhauf, the Hubble mission manager.The mission is the first in more than 21Ú2 years for Columbia, the oldest shuttle. During the interim, Columbia underwent a major refurbishment of its own, including modifications and repairs to the radiators.Flight control teams believe the blockage was likely caused by a little bit of debris, possibly a tiny piece of welding slag left behind during the refurbishment.The Columbia crew tried to keep the air of uncertainty that loomed over the first days of their difficult flight from becoming a distraction."We've gone on the assumption we're here to stay and will go on to do our job. We've kept that thought foremost in our minds," Columbia skipper Scott Altman said. "There has been so much to do to get ready for the rendezvous and the spacewalks. We've tried to keep ourselves busy and not think about it. We're charging ahead full speed with our eyes on the goal."Columbia's would be the fourth visit to the space telescope since the observatory was launched in 1990. Originally, observations were to come to an end in 2005.That date, however, was extended to 2010, a decision based in part on the upgrades the Columbia crew will make.The improvements to the solar-power system should furnish a 30 percent increase in electricity. The camera work should upgrade the telescope tenfold in clarity and speed of observations of faint, distant stars and galaxies.