 Astronauts are about to make their fourth house call on an aging patient - the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope. Twelve years after its launch, Hubble's 12-ton body is getting a bit creaky. During five spacewalks starting next week, the crew of the space shuttle Columbia plans to refurbish some of the telescope's major parts. Blastoff is scheduled for Thursday morning. Among the new additions: A bigger and better workhorse camera, a modernized power system, more efficient solar panels and a refrigeratorlike machine designed to rescue an infrared camera that shut down in 1999 when its coolant ran out. HUBBLE'S HISTORY 1946: Astronomer Lyman Spitzer proposes putting a telescope into space, a radical idea in the pre-Sputnik era. 1977: Congress approves the space telescope project. 1990: The telescope, named for astronomer Edwin Hubble, is launched; its eventual cost rises to more than $2 billion for just the hardware. A few months after launch, scientists discover that Hubble's primary mirror was ground incorrectly, leaving its images blurry. 1993: Astronauts install corrective optics on the telescope, effectively fixing its vision. 1997: A second servicing mission installs new scientific instruments. 1999: Astronauts fly to Hubble for another repair when its gyroscopes fail. 2002: Another generation of instruments is scheduled to be installed. After the astronauts' checkup, the $2 billion-plus Hubble should be set to maintain its role as the world's premier astronomical observatory. "This is not your father's Oldsmobile," says Ray Villard, spokesman at the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore. Astronauts had always planned to repair the telescope every few years following its 1990 launch. Their first visit in 1993 was crucial; they installed a corrective optics system to compensate for Hubble's blurry vision, caused by a primary mirror that had been shaped incorrectly by a fraction of an inch. In 1997, astronauts took a more leisurely trip to install some new scientific instruments. In 1999, astronauts had to make another urgent trip when the gyroscopes that point the telescope failed. The upcoming $172 million trip will accomplish the rest of the planned upgrades - including replacing another component, one of four "reaction wheel assemblies" that help the telescope point properly. Another major task will be to remove Hubble's last original instrument, a European-built camera, and replace it with the Advanced Camera for Surveys. The new camera is about the size of a phone booth and weighs 870 pounds. Its discoveries could also be huge, researchers say. It has more than twice the field of view and nearly five times the resolution of the camera it replaces. Accordingly, it can churn out science results 10 times faster, project specialists say. The new instrument is like a giant digital camera with 16 million pixels, says Holland Ford, an astronomer at Johns Hopkins University and the Space Telescope Science Institute. Just like home digital cameras, the price of space cameras has come down: The $76 million Advanced Camera for Surveys cost less than half what the original camera did. Columbia's astronauts will also try to rescue another, older camera that takes pictures in near-infrared wavelengths. This type of camera is particularly good for taking pictures of dust-enshrouded regions, such as places where stars are born. But the camera needs to be very cold to work properly. Originally, the infrared camera lay next to a solid block of nitrogen, which kept it chilled. But a warm piece of metal moved closer to the nitrogen than expected, causing the gas to dissipate quickly and leaving the camera too warm to operate. Engineers have devised a new cooling system, which pumps heat out, to make the infrared camera cold again - although not as cold as it was before. "You can think of it like going from an icebox to a refrigerator," says David Leckrone, Hubble's senior scientist at the Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. But the cooling system is an experiment, and the flight to Hubble will be its first real test. Mission managers emphasized that the attempt might not succeed. "We would be overjoyed to get the thing actually working," says Anne Kinney, director of the astronomy and physics division at NASA's Office of Space Science. Another period of nail-biting will come when astronauts switch out Hubble's power system. For the first time since the telescope's launch, they will have to turn it completely off. Those moments will make Dr. Kinney "nervous as hell," she admits. Astronauts will have to unplug 36 small electrical connectors, change out the power control unit, and plug the new one in. By the time the astronauts leave Hubble, they also will have installed a new set of solar panels to supply electricity. The current panels, which have never been replaced, are operating at only 63 percent of the original power because of expected wear and tear, including radiation damage, says program manager Preston Burch. The new panels will be about one-third smaller than the old panels but produce 30 percent more power, he says. The smaller size also cuts down on aerodynamic drag. Over time, friction with the atmosphere causes Hubble to drift lower from its orbit, 360 miles above the surface. While the telescope is still docked to the shuttle, Columbia will probably fire its engines and take Hubble back up to its usual orbit before releasing it. NASA is planning just one more servicing mission to the telescope, in the next two to three years. When Hubble's 20-year lifetime is over, it will either be boosted very high in the atmosphere, or guided back to the ground, says Dr. Kinney. By then, NASA will be focused on the international Next Generation Space Telescope - a craft with a mirror that unfolds like a flower. That mission, set for launch by the end of the decade, will need to go flawlessly. It is designed to fly in space 930,000 miles from Earth, where the shuttle cannot reach it for repairs. 