President Jiang on Work After China's Entry into WTO President Jiang Zemin stressed Monday that China's entry into the WTO is a historic step in the process of reform and opening to the outside world. He said that China must improve its overall national strength and international competitiveness, establish and perfect the socialist market economic system, and safeguard its security and fundamental interests. "International Situation and WTO" Seminar FruitfulJiang made the remarks at the closing ceremony of the "International Situation and WTO" seminar for key leaders at provincial and ministerial levels. He said that China must improve its overall national strength and international competitiveness, establish and perfect the socialist market economic system, and safeguard its security and fundamental interests. The five-day seminar, held by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), closed Monday. Li Peng, member of the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau of the CPC Central Committee presided over the seminar. Other senior leaders including Zhu Rongji, Li Ruihuan, Hu Jintao, Wei Jianxing, and Li Lanqing also attended the ceremony. Eight students spoke at the seminar. They said that after five days' study and discussion, they have a clearer understanding of the current international situation and of why the CPC Central Committee made the strategic decision for China to enter the WTO. Positive Attitude Should be Taken At New Starting Point :Jiang*	Deepen the Reform and Increase Opening upJiang, also general secretary of the CPC Central Committee and chairman of the Central Military Commission, pointed out that the entry into the WTO marks a new phase in China's opening up to the outside world. "We should deepen the reform, increase our opening up and take a more positive attitude to the outside world at this new starting point," said Jiang, adding that efforts must be made to adapt to economic globalization, and to continue to push forward all-round, high-level, and wide-range opening up and provide powerful drive for the economic development of our country." *	Intl. Cooperation and Exchange of Great ImportanceHe stressed that international cooperation and exchange on the economy and technology have become more important for the economic development of every country. China must establish an efficient system and mechanism, create a favorable economic and social environment for opening up to the outside world, which is very important for cooperation. "The development of China's socialist market economy, the all-round opening up to the outside world, and our huge potential market, are the most powerful driving forces of China's entry into the WTO," said Jiang. *	Measures Should be Taken to Promote Industries and Business He also asked leaders at provincial and ministerial levels to make scientific analysis and get a complete knowledge of the opportunities, challenges, advantages and disadvantages brought by China's entry into the WTO. Measures should be taken to promote China's industries and businesses in improving their competitiveness, as well as its industrial restructuring and technological upgrading, Jiang said, who also called for the establishment of a series of large groups and multinationals with international competitiveness. He asked for nurturing medium and small sized enterprises with international competitiveness. *	Governments' Efforts Should Be Promoted"The entry into the WTO requires governments at various levels to noticeably improve their way and methods of managing economy," said Jiang, stressing that the training of special personnel is very urgent. Jiang said that pushing forward reform, opening up and socialist construction under the WTO situation is new to the whole party and it is also a new challenge. "As long as our comrades work together, we are sure to make the most of all opportunities brought by the WTO entry and push forward the reform, opening up and modernization drive," said Jiang. Product Quality An Essential Part: ZhuChinese Premier Zhu Rongji also made a speech at the seminar. He asked businesses to take product quality as an essential part of their work, for only high-quality products can reach and be accepted by the international market. Zhu Rongji urged departments and local governments to work together to promote a steady and healthy development of the national economy. President on China's WTO Entry & Info-tech ConstructionChinese president Jiang Zemin Sunday said during his inspection in Guangzhou that as a member of the WTO, China will strike a carefully-thought-out balance between honoring its commitments and enjoying its rights, said President Jiang Sunday in Guangzhou. Besides, Jiang attached great importance to the vigorous improvement of national economy and social informationization during his earlier inspection in Nanhai, Guangdong Province. Hu Jintao on Study of Int'l Situation Following WTO EntryVice President Hu Jintao called for an all-out effort to study the current international situation and opportunities as well as challenges now that China has joined the WTO. Hu stressed that entering the WTO conforms to China's basic interests and long-term benefit. It will be helpful for promoting further and wider international economic cooperation and competition. Fortune' Predicts China to be Workshop of WorldAn article in the newly published American magazine "Fortune" indicated that China is going to be a workshop of the world with a large number of high-quality technical personnel and huge markets. "Fortune" analyzed that 10 years ago China exported mainly toys, textiles and other cheap products, but now it has become a reliable and stable producer of high-value and high-technologically sophisticated products.  PRINT	 DISCUSSION	 CHINESE	 SEND TO FRIENDChina, a rising powerAn article in the newly published American magazine "Fortune" indicated that China is going to be a workshop of the world with a large number of high-quality technical personnel and huge markets. Earlier, "Newsweek" also pointed out the former "Four Small Asian Dragons"---Singapore, South Korea, and the regions of Hong Kong and Taiwan had spotted that everyone's property is all connected with China, a rising economic power. "Fortune" analyzed that 10 years ago China exported mainly toys, textiles and other cheap products, but now it has become a reliable and stable producer of high-value and high-technologically sophisticated products. Ever-larger marketIt noted that China is not only a low-cost exporting platform for multinational companies, but also an increasingly enlarged market. When SMIC first established a Shanghai-based factory, 80 percent of its clients were from the United States and the Taiwan region. But now half of its products are sold in the Chinese mainland. The executive CEO with SMIC said that the company's customers in China are still increasing in number. The article noted actually what executive CEOs with multinational companies are now considering is how much and when should they transfer their production capacity to China instead of whether they should do it or not. Analysts indicated that five years ago foreign investors cast their eyes on China's low tax rate, cheap labor force and vast market but lacked confidence in the quality of engineers; However, there have emerged a multitude of high-quality talents in both the coastal and inland areas nowadays. China Shock---original information from "Fortune"Ten years ago China's endless supply of cheap labor produced an endless supply of cheap (and often shoddy) products: toys and textiles and not a lot else. Today China still makes all that stuff--but a lot more besides. Drive through the now famous Pudong industrial zone in Shanghai, and you'll find spanking-new factories for as far as the eye can see. China's emergence as a reliable, stable producer of high-value, technologically sophisticated products will rewrite the economics of a wide range of manufacturing industries, not just those that are labor intensive (such as toys and textiles). In fact, that process is already well under way.CHINA SHOCKIt's All Made in China NowThe nation's rapid ascent up the technology ladder has huge consequences for the global economy. During the Industrial Revolution, Lancashire, in the northeast of England, was known as "the workshop of the world." At one point in the 1830s, the city quite literally possessed more machines than were on the rest of the planet combined. Today, in front of our very eyes, another workshop of the world is being created. It stretches down the eastern coast of China, from Dalian in the north to Shanghai, to Guangdong, and then further south to Fujian province, across the straits of Taiwan. It also now has pockets inland: in and around Beijing, for example, where rapid improvement in communications and transportation links are luring companies that once would have headed for the coast. China does not yet produce more manufactured goods than, say, all of Europe put together. But give it another decade. The historic transformation of the world's most populous country, from a maker of Winnie the Pooh dolls and Air Jordans to the world's high-tech foundry, could not be more apparent. A steady surge of foreign direct investment, unaffected, it seems, by global macroeconomic cycles, is recasting China's industrial base. And it is safe to say that the world, particularly Japan and the rest of Asia, will never be the same. Don't believe it? In the late 19th century, foreign capital flooded into a newly emerging nation with lots of cheap labor and an insatiable appetite for the latest in industrial technology. Soon enough, Lancashire wasn't the world's workshop anymore. The United States was. Ten years ago China's endless supply of cheap labor produced an endless supply of cheap (and often shoddy) products: toys and textiles and not a lot else. Today China still makes all that stuff--but a lot more besides. Drive through the now famous Pudong industrial zone in Shanghai, and you'll find spanking-new factories for as far as the eye can see. There's Intel, making high-end chips. Farther down the road is Corning, producing sophisticated photonics as well as ceramic casings for catalytic converters. Then there's Japan's Matsushita making delicate liquid crystal display screens; Thyssen Krupp, churning out steel in a stunningly automated plant; and Alcatel, producing practically everything in its arsenal--from digital switching systems to videoconferencing equipment. The company also has moved its Asia Pacific headquarters to Shanghai. Ask Ron Spithill, Asia Pacific president for the French telecom giant, whether there's anything he believes Alcatel could not now manufacture in China, and he pauses for a moment, thinks about it, and says, "No, I guess I really don't think there is." The implications of that answer are enormous. It means, first, that China's emergence as a reliable, stable producer of high-value, technologically sophisticated products will rewrite the economics of a wide range of manufacturing industries, not just those that are labor intensive (such as toys and textiles). In fact, that process is already well under way. For a global company, it simply means "that you have to have a major manufacturing presence in China, because if your competition isn't there yet, they soon will be," says Beijing-based Gordon Orr, China country manager for McKinsey & Co. Indeed, any CEO worth his salt these days is deciding not whether to move manufacturing capacity to China but how much and how quickly. As late as five years ago, companies produced in China to avoid high-tariff barriers (in autos, for example), to grab a foothold in a potentially giant market, or to get cheaper labor, mainly for making low-tech goods. Beyond that, China presented daunting problems for manufacturers. There were doubts about the quality of the work force. Infrastructure conditions, such as a dearth of good roads or rail systems, meant that just-in-time component-supply systems were difficult to implement. Intellectual property concerns, too, were common, as managers feared their most sophisticated manufacturing technologies could be ripped off almost as easily as a Lacoste shirt. Now, in China's coastal manufacturing hubs and in the industrial parks sprouting in and around Beijing, Chengdu, and other large interior cities, those concerns are fading fast. Multinationals have found China's labor force not only vast and cheap but also educated and disciplined. The country also has a huge and rapidly growing pool of young engineering talent from which companies can draw (at U.S. universities, by far the largest number of foreign graduate students in engineering and scientific disciplines are from China). The result has been foreign direct investment (FDI) in China of more than $112.3 billion during the past three years and another $86 billion expected in the next two, according to Jun Ma, chief economist at DBS Securities in Hong Kong. "To an increasing extent," says Ma, "these are big, strategic investments, meant to serve both the China market and high-tech export markets. They are not simply plays in pursuit of cheap labor." 