Tenuous relations between employers and undocumented workers will be further strained after Wednesday's ruling by the Supreme Court, people who work in immigration and labor circles say.Reversing a previously upheld decision, the nation's top court decided that illegal workers are not entitled to the same labor rights as legal workers when they are fired or mistreated. The case, brought by José Castro against Hoffman Plastic Compounds in California after he was fired for trying to unionize, originally resulted in a $67,000 judgment in his favor by the National Labor Relations Board.A federal appeals court agreed, but the Supreme Court reversed it.Several states, including Arizona, unsuccessfully lobbied for the decision to stand.Chief Justice William Rehnquist, writing for the court's majority, refused to allow the thousands of dollars in back pay "to an illegal alien for years of work not performed, for wages that could not lawfully have been earned, and for a job obtained in the first instance by a criminal fraud."Castro had gotten his job illegally, by using the birth certificate of a friend from Texas as proof of his eligibility to work in the United States."This ruling will have a major impact on our work," said David Grinberg, spokesman for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. "We are closely examining the decision, looking to see how it will affect our policy on undocumented workers."

Stephen Montoya, a civil rights lawyer in Phoenix, said many U.S. employers will now join the ranks of others that have traditionally taken advantage of undocumented workers."It's a double-whammy for unscrupulous employers. Now they have an incentive to hire them and then steal from them with total impunity," Montoya said. "The bad guy is getting off the hook, essentially being allowed to reap what they have not sown."Because the ruling applied to a case reviewed by the labor board, unions also feel slighted.Eliseo Medina, executive vice president of the Service Employees International Union, was bombarded with calls Wednesday when word of the ruling got out.The union stands to lose from the decision because essentially it strikes at its heart: bargaining power."In effect, now we're left with a law with no teeth," said Medina, who is based in Los Angeles. "Instead of providing your best workers protection, you give lawbreakers the green light to be more exploitative."Yet employers have had to deal with an immigration policy telling them that undocumented immigrants are breaking the law while labor law obligated them to treat all employees equally, whether they were legal or not.And, even with Wednesday's opinion, employers could still face legal action from undocumented workers, said Joe Clees, a partner with the Phoenix law firm Bryan Cave."It's still illegal to engage in unfair labor practice. Besides, in Arizona such a small percentage of employers are unionized that it won't really have much of an effect in the workplace."

President Bush has no apologies about raising millions of dollars for Republican Senate candidates immediately after signing into law new curbs on the financing of campaigns for federal office. 

After a major money-raising effort for Republican Senate candidates in South Carolina and Georgia, Bush was moving on to Dallas on Thursday to help boost the cash reserves of Texas Attorney General John Cornyn. 


Cornyn is seeking the seat being vacated by Republican Sen. Phil Gramm. 

"I'm not going to lay down my arms," Bush told reporters as he began the two-day circuit on Wednesday in Greenville, S.C. "I'm going to participate in the rules of the system." 

The stakes are high for the GOP. Democrats control the Senate by a single seat. 

"The Senate races are very important to me," Bush said. "I want the Republicans to take control of the Senate." 

Bush signed the campaign finance bill without ceremony in the Oval Wednesday morning. He barely had time to put the cap on his pen before he was off to raise cash for the three GOP candidates. 

The president's appearance helped raise about $1 million in Greenville on Wednesday for the campaign of Rep. Lindsay Graham who seeks the Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Strom Thurmond, the chamber's oldest and longest serving member. 

Moving on to Atlanta, the president raised $1.4 million for the campaign coffers of Rep. Saxby Chamblis, R-Ga., who is campaigning for the GOP nomination to face Democratic Sen. Max Cleland. 

The president plans to end the trip with a long Easter weekend at his ranch near Crawford. 

Bush had displayed little enthusiasm for the campaign finance proposal on the campaign trail two years ago and as it moved through Congress after he entered the White House. But he said Wednesday he "wouldn't have signed it if I was really unhappy with it." 

Bush said that overall he believes it improves the system even though parts of it may be constitutionally flawed. 

In all three cities Bush stopped to encourage police, fire and health emergency workers, to report on progress in the war on terrorism and to denounce rising violence in the Middle East. 

Bush was meeting Thursday in Dallas with rescue workers who traveled to New York to help in the World Trade Center response immediately after the terrorist attacks. 

The event was allotted just 15 minutes on the president's schedule. However, as an official government event it allowed the White House to split the cost of Bush's travel between the GOP and taxpayers. 

Democrats renewed their criticism of the arrangement, which was used heavily by President Bill Clinton. 

"The practice of adding political events to official travel for the purpose of saving candidates money seems to be of questionable merit," said Democratic National Committee spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri.


The U.S. economy, which fell into recession in early 2001, was already bouncing back in the final three months of the year, growing at an annual rate of 1.7 percent. 

The latest reading on the gross domestic product, the broadest measure of the economy's health, shows the expansion was at a faster pace than the government previously estimated, the Commerce Department said Thursday. 


The government initially estimated that the economy grew at tiny 0.2 percent rate in the fourth quarter, and a month ago that was revised to a 1.4 percent rate. 

Thursday's upward revision to the GDP largely reflected an improved trade picture, which was less of a drag on growth in the fourth quarter. 

While the 1.7 percent growth rate is still considered below par, it nonetheless marks a remarkable turnaround for the economy, which shrank at a 1.3 percent rate in the third quarter, following the jolt of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. 

Many economists estimate the GDP, which measures the total output of goods and services produced within the United States, continues to improve in the current quarter. 

Merrill Lynch predicts economic growth in the January-March quarter could be at a sizzling rate of 5 percent to 6 percent. Others forecast a rate in the 4 percent range; some expect 3 percent. Growth should be helped along as the Federal Reserve's 11 interest rate cuts last year make their way through the economy. 

Earlier this month, Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan offered his most optimistic assessment of the U.S. economy in more than a year, telling Congress recovery from the recession that began last March was under way. 

Manufacturers, which had throttled back production during the slump and laid off hundreds of thousands of workers, worked off big stocks of unsold goods and were beginning to add to production. 

Against that backdrop, inventory reduction was a little less of a drag on the GDP than previously thought. Inventory liquidation reduced the GDP by 2.16 percentage points in the fourth quarter, compared with a 2.19 percentage points subtraction estimated a month ago. 

The trade deficit, meanwhile, shaved off 0.14 percentage point from fourth-quarter GDP, compared with the 0.35 percentage point reduction previously estimated. That was the biggest factor in the GDP upward revision. 

Consumer spending, which accounts for two-thirds of all economic activity in the United States, grew at a 6.1 percent rate, slightly better than the 6 percent rate previously thought and a big pickup from the weak 1 percent rate in the third quarter. 

But business continued to cut investment in new plants and equipment, a key source of the overall economy's weakness. 

Economists say companies won't significantly rev up capital investment, production and hiring until corporate profits, which took a huge hit during the slump, improve. 

Thursday's report showed that after-tax profits of U.S. corporations fell at an annual rate of 10.6 percent in the fourth quarter, even worse than the 6.8 percent rate of decline posted in the third quarter. 

For all of 2001, after-tax profits fell by 15.9 percent, the first annual drop since 1982. 

In another report, the Labor Department said new claims for unemployment insurance rose by 18,000 to 394,000 last week, suggesting that demand for some workers is still fragile amid the fledgling recovery. 

Economists said the National Bureau of Economic Research, the recognized arbiters of when recessions begin and end, could decide that the downturn ended in December, January or February. 

While one rule of thumb for classifying a recession is two consecutive quarters of declining GDP, something that did not occur in the current downturn, the NBER uses several monthly statistics to better pinpoint the economy's exact turning points.


Boise Cascade Corp., a major timber company, says it is ending the logging of old-growth forests in the face of opposition from environmentalists. 

Old growth represented less than 1 percent of the supply for Boise Cascade, spokesman Mike Moser said. It was unclear how long it will take the company to disengage from contracts involving old growth. 


"It takes a little bit of time to transition out of the commitments we have in our contracts," Moser said Wednesday. 

Conservation groups have waged education campaigns to push consumers to demand that paper and wood products they buy not come from areas where trees have stood for hundreds or even thousands of years. 

Some of Boise Cascade's customers, including Kinko's paper products and the sportswear company Patagonia, stopped buying from the company. 

"We don't think they can yet claim the mantle of green forestry," Michael Brune of the Rainforest Action Network said of Boise Cascade. "This still is a dramatic turning point. Boise has been fighting change tooth and nail -- and now it says it won't." 

Boise Cascade was one of the largest timber companies still logging the big trees that provide habitat for scores of plants and animals. 

Kinko's spokeswoman Maggie Thill would not say whether the company would do business again with Boise Cascade. 

John Sterling, a Patagonia spokesman, called Boise Cascade's announcement "a great improvement" but cautioned, "It's a hard thing to know where the timber comes from." 

Brune accuses Boise Cascade of continuing to buy old growth from other countries, including Indonesia, Chile, Canada and Southeast Asia. The company denies it. 


Stocks climbed Thursday, led higher by the technology sector, as a handful of surprisingly strong economic reports fueled Wall Street's hopes for an economic rebound.
IN LATE-MORNING TRADING, the Nasdaq Composite Index was up around 21 points after closing Wednesday 3 points higher at 1,827. The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up about 50 points. It finished Wednesday 74 points higher at 10,427.
       Before the start of trading, the Commerce Department said it had revised its reading of U.S. fourth-quarter gross domestic product, the broadest measure of the economy's health, to an annual growth rate of 1.7 percent, indicating that the struggling U.S. economy was on the road to recovery in the final three months of 2001.
Separately, the Labor Department said the number of Americans lining up for first-time unemployment benefits last week rose by 18,000 to 394,000, a higher level than economists had expected.
       And the University of Michigan's final reading on consumer sentiment for March reportedly showed a reading of 95.7, up from a 90.7 reading for February.
       On Tuesday the Conference Board, a non-profit business research organization, said its consumer confidence report for March showed a reading of 110.2, hitting its highest level since August and up sharply from February's reading of 95.0. The news sent stock prices sharply higher. 

The Securities and Exchange Commission was concerned enough about International Business Machines Corp.'s financial disclosure practices two years ago that it asked the company to consider amending its 1999 annual report. The SEC request, which didn't lead to any changes in the computer company's annual report, came in a series of testy letters sent to IBM by the agency's Division of Corporation Finance, which is responsible for reviewing corporate filings, in mid-2000.
SEC questioned a number of IBM's accounting and disclosure practices, including the way it booked a $4.06 billion gain from an asset sale, and whether the company had told investors enough about the extent to which pension fund gains contributed to its bottom line.
       The four SEC letters were obtained through a Freedom of Information Act request.
       IBM declined to provide its responses to the SEC, but pointed out that it didn't amend its financial filings for 1999 or the first quarter of 2000, as the SEC staff had urged. In a statement, IBM said “comment letters such as these are routine for large, public companies,” adding that the issues “were closed in a satisfactory matter.”
 Securities attorneys agreed that it is common for the SEC's staff to question accounting practices when they review a company's annual reports and other filings. But some lawyers said the SEC's insistent requests for IBM to consider amending parts of its prior filings were unusual. Most companies are reluctant to amend filings because of fears it will alarm investors.
       “When they talk about amending, that's serious,” said Howard Schiffman, a lawyer with Dickstein Shapiro Morin & Oshinsky LLP in Washington. Noting that the SEC ultimately didn't force IBM to amend its filings, Mr. Schiffman said that likely means the SEC's staff “didn't think it was serious enough,” to require action. Companies generally file amendments if the staff threatens to turn the matter over to the SEC's enforcement division, he said.
       IBM's financial-disclosure policies have become controversial recently in the wake of news that that it sold off a small operation for a $280 million gain on the last day of 2001, an action that helped it meet analysts' earnings expectations for that quarter. The magnitude of the gain initially wasn't disclosed in any IBM news release.
       In the letters sent in 2000, the SEC staff had raised questions about IBM's handling of an even larger gain of about $4.06 billion, from the sale of its Global Networks business to AT&T Corp. Instead of booking the gain separately, IBM, Armonk, N.Y., included it as an offset to expenses under its “Sales, General and Administrative” line in its income statement.


Auto industry freshens product lines .

In a bid to lure younger buyers, car makers unveiled a host of new models Wednesday at the New York International Automobile Show. Among the launches, Saturn is adding a new small car to invigorate its product line and appeal to budget-minded buyers that normally gravitate toward entry-level Japanese or South Korean compact cars. Honda and Nissan offered up their own lineups — aimed at a coming wave of 75 million potential customers in the United States born from the late 1970s to the mid-1990s, known collectively as “Generation Y” or the “Echo Boomers.”
which was introduced Wednesday during a media preview day at the auto show, follows General Motors Corp.'s introduction of Saturn's original S-Series almost 12 years ago as the answer to low-priced, youth-oriented imports.
       The small car segment represents 14 percent of the passenger car market, with about 30 percent of sales to first-time buyers, said Jill Lajdziak, Saturn vice president of sales, service and marketing.
       The ION is slightly larger than the S-Series and will run on a more robust powertrain, featuring the Ecotec 2.2-liter, four-cylinder engine producing 137 horsepower.
       A five-speed manual transmission is standard, but for the first time in North America, an automatic, continuously variable transmission will be available as an option on some models. The transmission was to be installed on Saturn's VUE sport utility vehicle, but was delayed because of faulty parts.
       Perhaps the most dramatic difference is the instrument cluster, which has been moved to the center of the vehicle from the traditional spot behind the steering wheel.
       For Saturn, the ION represents another important brick toward rebuilding its aging product line. The process began with the introduction of the VUE sport utility vehicle last December, followed by a complete restyling of its mid-sized L-Series.
       “The novelty of Saturn is 11 years old. It's not novel anymore,” said Jim Hall of the automotive consulting firm AutoPacific. 

