
LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - R&B singer Aaliyah, tragically killed in a plane crash last August, gets an eerie screen resurrection this week in a vampire movie that features the young actress in a poignant death scene. 
Aaliyah, 22, had just completed filming "Queen of the Damned" when her plane crashed in the Bahamas, transforming the rising star into a cult figure in death and putting Hollywood in a spin over how, or even if, to promote the movie. 
After months of speculation about whether the film would go straight to video, "Queen of the Damned" opens in theaters on Friday with a little help from Aaliyah's brother, and lot of buzz from fans. 
Based on the third book in Anne Rice's "Vampire Chronicles," "Queen of the Damned" features Aaliyah in a role that poses a striking contrasts to her "sweet but street" image. 
In the movie, helped by a posthumous remix of some lines by her brother Rashad, Aaliyah slinks around in bronze body paint, baring fangs, as the vile and vicious 6,000-year-old Egyptian vampire Queen Akasha, who is bent on ruling the Earth. 
In her last scene, she is made up as a stone statue whose body, with the help of special effects, crumbles into dust. 
Director Michael Rymer sees the movie as neither a homage to Aaliyah, nor the kind of exploitation of her cult status after death that some fans have complained of. 
CLOSE FAMILY 
"My main concern is to be respectful and loving to her family and fans who are so devoted and also upset by the events," Rymer told Reuters. 
"It upsets me to watch her interviews or videos. But as Akasha, she's so far removed from who she really was, I can watch the film. 
"My reaction upon hearing about her passing away was shock and thoughts for her family because you've never met such a close family and it's a big hole in their lives," Rymer said. 
Producer Jorge Saralegui noted that Aaliyah's family had been supportive and positive, saying that the film showed her legacy exactly as they wanted. 
"In terms of film promotion, I haven't had any concerns," Saralegui said. "The thing you can't do is have fun, but people are more interested because of Aaliyah having died than they were before." 
Race has become another point of contention. 
Although the book describes Akasha as white, Rymer specifically lobbied to cast a person of color saying that a 6,000 year old Egyptian Queen should not look like Elizabeth Taylor. 
"It has nothing to do about being racist," Rymer said. 
Saralegui said; "On one hand the Anne Rice fans are upset that Aaliyah is not white, then the Aaliyah fans start calling these fans racists." 
Aaliyah made her screen debut in "Romeo Must Die" (2000) and her vocals have been featured in films such as "Anastasia" and "Dr. Dolittle". 
Her self-titled album, released in July, surged back into the top of the pop sales charts after her death, and in January she posthumously won two American Music Awards. 

