No sign bin Laden had nukes Black market duped al-Qaida, U.S. saysWASHINGTON - An analysis of suspected radioactive substances seized in Afghanistan has found nothing to prove that Osama bin Laden reached his decadelong goal of acquiring nuclear materials for a bomb, administration officials say.The analysis of suspicious canisters, computer discs and documents conducted by the government suggests, in fact, that bin Laden and al-Qaida may have been duped by black-market weapons swindlers selling crude containers hand-painted with skulls and crossbones and dipped, perhaps, in medical waste to fool a Geiger counter, officials said.More than 110 government buildings, military compounds, terrorist camps, safe houses and caves in Afghanistan have been searched for clues about al-Qaida's plans and its development of advanced terror weapons. U.S. intelligence officers and special forces found three containers with contents worrisome enough to be shipped back for detailed analysis by nuclear scientists.No significant amount of radioactive material was found in the containers, two seized at the Taliban Ministry of Agriculture in Kabul and one at an al-Qaida compound in the Kandahar region, officials said."We did not find any type of serious radiological material," one Pentagon official said. "The stuff we found in Afghanistan was not the real stuff. They were swindled, like a lot of other people."Another administration official who has been briefed on the materials seized in Afghanistan said, "Their value for a weapon was zero."But officials cautioned that it is impossible to make a blanket assertion that al-Qaida possesses no nuclear material.Al-Qaida still has the desire and resources to seek and, perhaps someday, acquire nuclear materials, or biological or chemical ones, that could be used in a terror attack, officials said.Toymaker cashes in on young-at-heartLast Updated: 25 February, 2002 15:01 GMT 	Print This Article By Takaya Yamaguchi and Yuka Obayashi TOKYO (Reuters) - Japan's third-largest toymaker, Takara, won't limit itself to making toys just for children, says President Keita Sato. Takara, whose popular miniature toy car the "Choro Q" has long won the hearts of Japanese children, is hoping that a real, single-seater electric car it unveiled last month will ensure that it is not just known for kids' toys. The toymaker, which is set to post a record group net profit for the current year ending March 31, has already had some success in developing entertainment products for adults, including karaoke systems for the home, remote-controlled cars targeted at young men, and robots that can open beer cans. "Although our core business will remain toys, our objective is to become a life entertainment company by applying our knowledge of kids' toy business to everyday products that can also entertain adults," Sato told Reuters in an interview. He said Takara will start taking orders for the electric vehicle, which can travel up to 60 kmh (37 mph), in July or August with a price tag of around one million yen (5,240 pounds). It aims to sell 1,000 in the first year. "Cars, home appliances and mobile communications are the areas where we see growth opportunity by introducing toys with a 'playful approach' that can fulfil the appetite of adults." PROFIT BOOST The Tokyo-based company can afford to think bigger. It expects to post a record group net profit in 2001/02, improving slightly on its November target of 5.2 billion yen and exceeding its previous high of 2.8 billion yen marked in 1986/87. Sato did not give the exact figure. The success of Takara's popular spinning-top-like "Bey Blade" and "E-kara" home karaoke system helped its profit soar more than 10 times year-on-year for the six months through September. "Bey Blade and E-kara have been our main driving force. There's no chance our net profit will fall below our forecast," Sato said. Sato, 44, took the helm of Takara in early 2000. He has implemented a range of restructuring measures, such as cutting jobs and closing loss-making units, while mapping out ambitious financial targets, including sales of 100 billion yen in 2003/04, compared with 44 billion yen in 2000/01. "In order to achieve those goals, we need to widen our product mix in toy-related areas like Bandai has been doing, generating profit from not only toys but also capsuled toys, clothing, snacks and other products." The overseas market should provide another way of meeting earnings targets. Last year, Takara formed a broad alliance with U.S. toy giant Hasbro and began collaborating in promoting such products as E-kara in North America. "We will use the tie with Hasbro to expand sales in the U.S. and Europe while using alliances with local companies for Asian markets," the president said. (c) Copyright Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Any copying, re-publication or re-distribution of Reuters content or of any content used on this site, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without prior written consent of Reuters. Quotes and other data are provided for your personal information only, and are not intended for trading purposes. Reuters, the members of its Group and its data providers shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the quotes or other data, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon. (c) Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Reuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group of companies around the world. www.reuters.co.uk