Juarez center fights for forgotten women Advocate wants justice for scores of slain femalesJack Kurtz/The Arizona RepublicEsther Chavez Cano speaks for those who have no voice: women who are victims of domestic violence, rape and murder. Such women are often ignored by authorities in Juarez, Mexico.By Tessie BordenRepublic Mexico City BureauFeb. 26, 2002 12:00:00JUAREZ, Mexico - It's 9:30 a.m., and Esther Chavez Cano's daily personal war with the unwanted problems of this largest of the border cities has begun.She rushes into her office at Casa Amiga, the rape crisis center that grew out of the violence that has claimed the lives of more than 200 young women here in the past nine years. Close behind is a staff member describing this morning's emergency: a neighbor found two girls, 8 and 10, wandering in the city's El Chamizal park the previous night. They told the woman they were running away from their father's beatings.Chavez Cano immediately calls the local district attorney's office, and one gets the feeling she has done this hundreds of times. In a firm but friendly tone, she calls on the attorneys there to take charge of the children and investigate what they say.Chavez Cano's Casa Amiga is the only center of its kind on the Mexican side of the 1,950-mile line that separates the country from the United States. Established in February 1999, it receives funding from both U.S. and Mexican organizations.Chavez Cano, 66, a diminutive, retired accountant whose mild manner causes listeners to lean in just to hear her, is perhaps the most outspoken and militant voice here on violence against women.In 1993, she noticed a trend among crimes committed in Juarez: dozens of young women were turning up slain in the surrounding desert. The bodies showed evidence of beatings, rape and strangulation. Many of the women fit a distinct profile: tall and thin, with long, dark hair and medium skin, between ages 11 and 25. Often, they came from the ranks of workers who yearly swell Juarez's population from other parts of rural Mexico to work at border assembly plants, or maquiladoras.HARARE (Reuters) - Zimbabwe's main opposition leader said on Monday police had charged him with treason but he still expected to contest next month's presidential elections. "I've been formally charged with treason," Morgan Tsvangirai, President Robert Mugabe's leading adversary in the March 9-10 polls, told reporters after he was questioned for more than two hours by police. The Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) leader was summoned to police headquarters in Harare over an alleged plot to assassinate 78-year-old Mugabe, based on a mysterious videotape. "They read to me a 'warned and cautioned' statement that I and my colleagues, MDC secretary-general Welshman Ncube and Renson Gasela and Rupert Johnson knowingly planned to assassinate President Mugabe," Tsvangirai said. "Of course I denied that completely. I said this whole thing is contrived to damage me politically," he told a news conference at his home, flanked by his lawyer and by MDC deputy president Gibson Sibanda. If found guilty he could be sentenced to death or life imprisonment but Tsvangirai said he believed police would not proceed with any prosecution before the elections. He was questioned as part of a police investigation that was opened after an Australian television channel broadcast video footage on February 13 which purported to show Tsvangirai discussing the possibility of "eliminating" Mugabe. Tension in the southern Africa country is rising rapidly, with the opposition accusing Mugabe's supporters of violent intimidation and the United States and European Union clamping personal sanctions against the president and his inner circle. OBSERVERS SEEK POLICE PROTECTION The leader of a South African observer mission said on Monday she had asked for police protection for her team after an attack on Sunday. Hundreds of Mugabe's followers ambushed people leaving a campaign rally on Sunday addressed by Tsvangirai in Chinhoyi, Mugabe's hometown and a ruling ZANU-PF party stronghold. They later stoned vehicles, hitting a minibus carrying observers. "I'm very anxious. It is my responsibility to ensure all the time the safety of the delegation. I've been liasing with police in Harare and Chinhoyi to ensure that the lives of the observers are safe," Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula told reporters in Harare. She declined to blame Mugabe's supporters for the incident. European Union observers pulled out last week after the government refused to accredit their Swedish leader, leaving mainly African and Commonwealth observers to determine whether increasing violence will prevent a free and fair election. Sunday's incidents capped a week in which police shot at Tsvangirai's campaign convoy, militants attacked an opposition office and self-styled liberation war veterans forced a white farmer and his family to flee their farm. BRITAIN DENIES PLOT On Monday the government-controlled Herald newspaper stepped up attacks on Britain, accusing the former colonial power of plotting to overthrow Mugabe if he wins the election. Quoting unnamed sources, it said Britain's high commissioner (ambassador) in Harare, Brian Donnelly, was masterminding a plot with Tsvangirai and members of Zimbabwe's tiny white minority. "Waves of violence will be instigated from three flash points on Zimbabwe's border points with Zambia, Mozambique and Botswana where the MDC has sought to establish military training camps under the guise of refugee camps," The Herald said. It quoted Donnelly saying: "It's total nonsense to suggest that Britain is planning any form of violence in Zimbabwe." Mugabe accuses London of trying to unseat him in reprisal for taking farmland owned by whites of mainly British extraction and redistributing it to landless blacks. In reply Britain says Mugabe has become an autocrat who has driven Zimbabwe and its economy into the ground. Prime Minister Tony Blair's government has so far failed to have Zimbabwe suspended from the Commonwealth. But the issue will resurface when the grouping of Britain and its former colonies holds a summit in Brisbane, Australia at the weekend. United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan urged Mugabe's government on Monday not to tamper with the election. "The situation in Zimbabwe is worrying," Annan told reporters after meeting Blair in London. "I believe that the people of Zimbabwe should be given a chance for a free and fair election and once they have voted, the voice of the people must be respected." Zimbabwe charges opposition leader with treason S.Africa observers seek Zimbabwe police protection Angolan leader seeks rapid steps to ceasefire Congo peace talks delayed, eyes on arrivals  Angolan leader wants ceasefire; UNITA seeks leader Congolese see Angolan rebel's death helping peace At least eight Somalis killed in clashes-witnesses  Israel eases Arafat "siege"; four killed Sudan says U.S. suspension of peace contacts "hasty" South African tourist shot dead in Ethiopia Disclaimer | Copyright | Privacy | Contact UsBy Kieran Murray BOGOTA, Colombia (Reuters) - Colombian President Andres Pastrana accused Marxist rebels on Monday of "kidnapping democracy" with the weekend abduction of a presidential candidate but her party said the government was also to blame. Ingrid Betancourt, a critic of the rebels who has under 1 percent voter support, was seized on Saturday with her campaign manager after flouting military advice and trying to enter a former rebel enclave just as the army moved in to reclaim it. "These violent people have attacked democracy again, this time kidnapping no less than a presidential candidate -- something we condemn with all our strength," Pastrana said. "Kidnapping members of Congress, now kidnapping a presidential candidate, and kidnapping Colombians is kidnapping democracy," he added in the southern city of Neiva. Betancourt's party complained that authorities turned down her requests for a seat on a military helicopter that took Pastrana into the area on Saturday. "In a democracy, the government is the one responsible for what happens to its citizens," the small centrist party, New Colombia, said in a statement. Senior government ministers have suggested Betancourt was at fault for insisting on driving to the town of San Vicente just hours after army troops marched in, pushing rebels to retreat to jungle bases. "The world is watching to see if this is a true democracy and proving it will depend on the ability of Pastrana and his government to bring back Ingrid alive," New Colombia said. Pastrana ordered the army to retake the rebels' enclave -- a Switzerland-sized chunk of ranch land and jungle -- after the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known in Spanish as FARC, hijacked an airliner and kidnapped a senator last week. He had ceded the southern zone to the rebels in late 1998 to spur peace talks, but the audacious hijack was the final straw and Pastrana declared the doomed process dead. He has said there will be no truce until the FARC stops its attacks and kidnappings. Colombians had been fed up with the talks' failure to stop violence, which always raged unchecked outside the zone. Colombia's 38-year war pits leftist rebels against far-right paramilitary outlaws and state security forces and has claimed 40,000 lives in the last decade alone. The FARC holds more than 800 hostages, including five legislators. Most were seized for ransom and are held in makeshift jungle camps, sometimes for years, but the lawmakers were captured as pawns to win the release of jailed rebels. Extortion and the cocaine trade are the 17,000-strong FARC's chief sources of cash. The United States, which has poured more than $1 billion in mostly military aid into Pastrana's drug-busting "Plan Colombia," said Betancourt's kidnap was "a very tragic example" of typical FARC tactics and it backed ending peace talks. The army retook the former enclave's five towns without resistance but guerrillas were still roaming nearby and there were some clashes on Monday. 'MORE WAR, MORE VIOLENCE' Reuters reporters saw around 50 rebels, some in their teens, stopping cars on the road where Betancourt was kidnapped. One of the rebels, who gave his name as Eduardo, said the army takeover "will spark more war, more violence." A statement by the paramilitaries' political chief, Carlos Castano, praised Pastrana for standing up to the FARC and said, "All we need is for the new president of Colombia to start governing, as Pastrana has ended up doing." Independent Alvaro Uribe, who has long favored a tough line with the guerrillas, is expected to win the May 26 vote by a landslide. Analysts predict an upsurge of violence in the run-up to the elections. A French photographer seized with Betancourt but later freed said the 40-year-old mother of two knew she was playing with fire but was too proud to turn back after announcing she would travel there to show solidarity with locals. "She had made so much noise that although everyone warned her, she didn't want to go back," Alain Keler, who was working for Marie Claire magazine, told Reuters. "She was probably afraid that in changing her mind, she would look ridiculous." The army has deployed helicopters over the dense jungle searching for Betancourt but considers it too risky to send ground troops to hunt for her and her captors. Betancourt's mother, Yolanda Pulecio, told local television she was worried a military assault to free her daughter would do more harm than good. "It's very, very dangerous," she said. U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan condemned the kidnapping and called on the FARC to release all its captives. (c) Copyright Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Any copying, re-publication or re-distribution of Reuters content or of any content used on this site, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without prior written consent of Reuters. Quotes and other data are provided for your personal information only, and are not intended for trading purposes. Reuters, the members of its Group and its data providers shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the quotes or other data, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon. (c) Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Reuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group of companies around the world. 