The Bush administration, seeking to nurture a growing intelligence relationship with Syria in the war on terrorism, has refrained from confronting Damascus about its illicit imports of Iraqi oil, despite what industry analysts say is a sharp increase in volume.

A year after Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said he won assurances from Syrian President Bashar Assad that his government would not buy Iraqi oil in violation of U.N. sanctions, Syria has boosted its imports, according to industry analysts and administration officials. Syria is now receiving between 150,000 and 200,000 barrels of oil daily through a pipeline it opened in late 2000, paying as much as $1 billion a year to Iraq, these analysts and officials said.

This makes Syria the single largest source of money to Baghdad outside the U.N. oil-for-food sanctions program, which sharply restricts how Iraq can spend oil revenue. The United States favors a British initiative at the United Nations to bring the pipeline into compliance and, if not, to shut it all together.

But U.S. officials have applied little direct pressure on Damascus to do so, even though this revenue is one of the few ways Iraqi President Saddam Hussein can pay to maintain his military and finance any efforts to acquire weapons of mass destruction.

President Bush has declared that Iraq's pursuit of weapons of mass destruction poses one of the most dangerous threats to the United States. Yet the administration has chosen not to actively try to plug the largest leak in the Iraqi embargo, arguing the timing is not opportune. "Make no mistake about it, the pipeline issue is a serious topic and a point of contention," said a U.S. official. "Are we willing to make it a sticking point so that it affects the relationship between our two countries? No. We have to be pragmatic."

John D. Negroponte, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, restated the U.S. opposition to the Iraqi oil purchases during a trip to Damascus last month, but diplomats said he did so only in passing.

When the State Department's top Middle East diplomat, Assistant Secretary William J. Burns, visited Damascus in December, he briefly noted the administration's unhappiness with the oil imports but focused much of his discussions on U.S.-Syrian cooperation in the war on terrorism, administration officials said. Although it remains on the State Department's list of state sponsors of terrorism, Syria has stepped up its sharing of intelligence with the United States concerning militant groups linked to Osama bin Laden, the leader of the al Qaeda network blamed for the Sept. 11 attacks, officials said.

In its early days, the Bush administration sought to reinvigorate economic sanctions on Baghdad, which were imposed after Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990. Powell proposed streamlining the restrictions while working with Iraq's neighbors to adopt new border controls to prevent the smuggling of oil out of the country and other goods into the country.

The emphasis on tightening border controls, however, has faded. The U.S. "smart sanctions" initiative, which was designed to ease restrictions on Iraqi civilian imports while tightening those on goods bound for Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's military and weapons programs, has run into resistance. The administration has refocused its energies and is concentrating on winning Security Council agreement on a new, refined list of goods that Iraq could be barred from importing because there is a possibility they could be used for military purposes.

Last February, while touring Middle Eastern capitals to build support for his sanctions proposal, Powell stopped in Damascus for a meeting with Assad. Powell told reporters afterward that Assad had made a commitment to bring the oil imports and the revenue they generate in compliance with U.N. sanctions. 

"I have high confidence that will work out because we went back to the point with the president three times . . . and three times there was a solemn agreement," Powell said. "I think the Syrians are serious about this, but of course the ultimate test of seriousness is when we see something happen."

Powell left open whether the 552-mile pipeline, which connects Iraq with Syria's Mediterranean port of Banias, would be brought under U.N. control immediately or when the sanctions were scheduled for renewal last June.

But neither occurred, and shortly after Powell left Damascus, the Syrian government said it had never made a pledge. Damascus also denies importing significant amounts of Iraqi oil, saying it is merely testing the pipeline, which was closed for 19 years during the Iran-Iraq War. 

Syria's ambassador to the United States, Rostom Zoubi, said his country has received "some quantities" of Iraqi crude in the course of checking out the pipeline and did not pay for any oil. When the pipeline is ready to go into service, Zoubi said, Syria will apply to the U.N. Security Council for permission to operate it under the auspices of the oil-for-food program, which allows Iraq to sell oil to pay for food, medicine and other civilian needs. He added that Syria plans to establish a second, more economical pipeline for Iraqi oil and will also operate that one in accordance with U.N. requirements even though Damascus believes that sanctions should be lifted to relieve the suffering of the Iraqi people.

"Syria has always complied with United Nations Security Council resolutions," Zoubi said. "Syrian trade with Iraq is always based on the oil-for-food program."

In the months after the existing pipeline reopened, Syria received about 120,000 barrels a day of Iraqi crude, vastly more than testing would require, according to industry analysts. The volume increased last year until the fall, when the flow slackened.

"After September 11, the Syrians wanted to take a somewhat lower profile," said James Placke, a senior associate at Cambridge Energy Research Associates. Analysts attributed that in part to Syrian apprehension that it could be caught up in the U.S.-led war on terrorism.

But Syria accelerated its pumping of Iraqi crude this winter. Some oil experts, such as Placke and Leo Drollas, chief economist at the Centre for Global Energy Studies in London, estimate the pipeline is moving about 150,000 barrels daily. By contrast, the Middle East Economic Survey, a weekly newsletter that covers the oil and gas industries, says the amount is between 180,000 and 200,000 barrels. U.S. intelligence puts the figure in the broader range of 150,000 to 200,000 barrels.

It is difficult to measure precisely the amount of Iraqi oil crossing the border. Analysts can only gauge the volume of Iraqi oil entering Syria by observing increases in Syria's own exports. The oil from Iraq is used for domestic Syrian consumption, freeing higher quality Syrian-produced oil for the international market.

Analysts also are not sure what Syria pays for Iraqi oil. But they speculate that Iraq is offering discounts of $2 to $3 per barrel to entice Damascus to flout the U.N. restrictions. 

Calling this the most "flagrant violation of sanctions against Iraq," British diplomats said in a statement that the oil sales could be providing Baghdad with up to $1 billion in illegal revenue. And unlike oil sales under the sanctions program, the money generated is not deposited in controlled U.N. accounts used for humanitarian imports and to compensate Kuwaiti victims of the 1990 invasion.

Syria is not the only offender cited. Analysts said that Jordan imports at least 82,000 barrels a day of Iraqi crude and oil products outside the U.N.-sanctioned program, and that Turkey receives between 10,000 and 40,000 barrels a day of black market Iraqi diesel and fuel oil. Unlike Syria, these two countries are American allies and have faced little U.S. criticism.

Though President Bush has highlighted Iraq as a member of an "axis of evil," it remains unclear whether tougher U.S. diplomacy could choke off the flow of oil in the absence of agreement at the United Nations on a new sanctions regime.

"When there is so much economic benefit to be gained by both parties, what they say to Powell is one thing, and what they do is another," Drollas said.

For Syria's struggling economy, the discounted oil is particularly attractive. As a further reward, Baghdad has steered millions of dollars in trade to Syrian merchants. Syrian exports to Iraq through the oil-for-food program have tripled over the last six months to $900 million, making Syria Baghdad's second-largest source of imports, after Russia.

Drollas said the increased volume moving through the Syrian pipeline also reflects a heightened Iraqi need for cash that reflects the trouble it has encountered with its other schemes for dodging U.N. restrictions. Iran has increasingly blocked the smuggling of Iraqi oil into the Persian Gulf, where a U.S.-led interdiction force has become more vigilant, analysts said. Only about 10,000 barrels a day now slip through the Shatt al-Arab waterway that separates Iraq and Iran, Drollas estimated.

The United States and its allies have also redoubled efforts to block Iraq from winning illicit surcharges from oil purchasers, analysts said.

The Bush administration, however, has not tried to plug the leak to Syria with the same vigor. "Our priorities have changed since 9-11," said Henri J. Barkey, a professor and expert on Iraq at Lehigh University.

