A lot of business owners who thought they were finished with tax return preparation this year might have to file amended returns, thanks to the economic stimulus bill signed by President Bush over the weekend.The legislation makes a number of retroactive changes that will affect 2001 tax bills, primarily for businesses, which grabbed the lion's share of relief in the $39 billion measure. Although several provisions affect individuals, most of these don't start until 2002.The timing of the legislation is curious, and not just because the stimulus is coming with the economy emerging from recession. More unusual, Congress rarely enacts retroactive changes this late in the tax filing season: Federal returns are due March 15 for corporations with fiscal years ending Dec. 31."I don't recall Congress ever passing a change in tax law that affects so many prior-year returns," said Bob Kamman, a Phoenix tax attorney and return preparer.The latest changes also may cost Arizona, since the state links its tax collections to federal tax laws. The Department of Revenue had projected a $6 million revenue shortfall for the state in fiscal 2002 due to major changes in federal tax rules last year, with the shortfalls rising sharply in future years. The Department of Revenue hasn't yet estimated the impact from the latest legislation, spokesman Jeff Kros said.However, the left-leaning Center on Budget and Policy Priorities projects that one new provision, a depreciation "bonus" for businesses, will cost Arizona $262 million from fiscal 2002 to 2004.The bonus increases first-year deductions by 30 percent on most business equipment while excluding real estate and buildings, according to tax research firm RIA. It applies to equipment bought after Sept. 10, 2001.Another business break will let companies carry back operating losses five years instead of two, creating more refund opportunities since firms will have more potentially profitable years against which to apply losses. This break applies to losses arising in 2001 and 2002.For individuals, one of the more interesting changes will let teachers deduct up to $250 a year in 2002 and 2003 for classroom expenses such as supplies, books and equipment. Before, these costs were deductible only if they exceeded 2 percent of adjusted gross income, said Mark Luscombe, principal tax analyst at CCH Inc.Another change expands the use of personal tax credits for people subject to the alternative minimum tax, and another provision allows for higher depreciation on luxury autos bought after Sept. 11 if used for business.The bill extends tax-sheltered Medical Savings Accounts through 2003. It also confirms that anyone turning 50 can make "catch-up" investments in IRAs and other retirement plans in the same year, even if made before the person actually turns 50.NEW YORK - Spooked by weak sales predictions and accounting investigations in the telecommunications and technology sectors, investors collected profits Tuesday and left the stock market with a mixed close.Tech stocks retreated, but blue chips scratched out a small gain. Analysts said investors, after pushing tech prices higher last week, were shifting away from the volatile sector until earnings prospects improve or stocks become cheaper.The Dow Jones industrial average closed up 21.11, or 0.2 percent, at 10,632.35, according to preliminary calculations. It was also the Dow's second straight day to close above 10,600, a level last reached in July.Broader stock indicators fell. The technology-focused Nasdaq composite index dropped 32.37, or 1.7 percent, to 1,897.12. The Standard & Poor's 500 index fell 2.68, or 0.2 percent, to 1,165.58.Although Tuesday's selling coincided with disappointing news, many analysts had predicted a pullback. Stocks have been steadily moving higher all month, with the Nasdaq advancing 7 percent last week, leading to speculation that Wall Street was ready for some retrenchment."The market has been very strong of late and was due for a pause to refresh, regardless of whether there was good news or bad news," said Alfred E. Goldman, chief market strategist for A.G. Edwards & Sons Inc.Stock prices also remain a concern. Although Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan said last week that a recovery from the recession "is already well under way," jittery investors still are worried that the recovery will be muted and profits lackluster. They fear that some stocks have risen too much given the uncertainty.First-quarter earnings season, which begins next month, is expected to provide more indications about the future. But no one knows whether the reports will be strong enough to sustain the market's advance.Wall Street punished stocks it feared wouldn't deliver big returns.Qwest Communications International Inc. completed one of several key steps Tuesday to avoid defaulting on its loan agreements, finishing the sale of bonds worth $1.5 billion.On another front, the company said it hopes to file a Federal Communications Commission application in late April to offer long-distance service in Arizona. The company offers long distance in the states where it does not provide local phone service, and it hopes to win FCC approval to sell long distance in the remaining 14 Western states.Before Tuesday's bond sale, the company said it had enough cash to meet the terms of its loan through June. Spokesman Tyler Gronbach declined to comment at length on the bond sale, saying, "We've said we'll spend it on either short-term or long-term debt."Qwest will violate bank-loan terms if it doesn't reduce $24.9 billion in debt. In addition to the bond sale, Qwest hopes to re-negotiate the terms of its loans and sell assets.Qwest's financial woes have been made worse by a Securities and Exchange Commission investigation of the company's accounting practices. The SEC investigation spooked investors, who declined to renew short-term loans.In Arizona, the Corporation Commission has approved Qwest's compliance with three more federally mandated checklist items to enter the long-distance market. Twelve of 14 items have been satisfied.ATLANTA - Brad Davis is getting $1,850 back from the Internal Revenue Service, more than double his refund from the prior year. While computers, TVs and appliances may be had with that amount, Davis isn't buying."I'm just going to sit on it," the 35-year-old Atlanta resident said. Davis lost his job in January as a sales representative for a maker of commercial skin-care products. The refund and severance are enough to tide him through May, he says.Refunds are up 17 percent, or $74 billion, so far this year as Americans submit income tax forms showing households paid more in advance than they owed. Legislation signed in June by President Bush cut tax burdens, entitling some payers to more than the advance refunds, or "rebates," of $300 to $600 distributed last year. The added money may provide a cushion rather than a spur to an economy climbing out of recession."Most of the tax rebate last year wasn't spent, but enough was to keep the economy going," said Christopher Low, chief economist at First Tennessee Bank in New York. "We're seeing the same thing this year."One reason is that the number of unemployed workers climbed to 7.9 million last month from 5.9 million in February 2001. Investors also claimed stock market losses.A reduction in the amount of tax withheld from paychecks starting Jan. 1 contributed to a 1.6 percent rise in January in disposable personal income, the largest monthly gain since August. The legislation had created a new 10 percent tax bracket, as opposed to 15 percent, retroactive to Jan. 1, 2001. 