
By Kristin Roberts 

NEW YORK (Reuters) - Northrop Grumman Corp. NOC.N on Friday unveiled an unsolicited takeover bid of at least $6 billion for TRW Inc. TRW.N that would create a powerhouse in satellite and missile-defense systems and challenge Boeing's ranking as the No. 2 U.S. defense contractor. 

Northrop said it was prepared to offer $47 in Northrop shares for each TRW share, and indicated it might be willing to raise the bid. 

Wall Street appeared to embrace that notion, boosting TRW shares more than 27 percent to their highest level since August 2000, and 8 percent above Northrop's offer price. 

TRW said its management would "address" the proposal, and it advised shareholders not to take any immediate action. 

"It's a terrific fit," said Cai von Rumohr, analyst at SG Cowen. "It rounds out their portfolio and clearly cements them as a real heavyweight player." 

"The thing you don't know is what is TRW's response going to be," von Rumohr said. "It seems like they're lukewarm, so either they want more money, they want to remain independent but they'll sell you the defense business, or they're going to call someone else to see if someone else is interested." 

Northrop said that after combining the companies, it would separate TRW's auto parts business, which it said was not a good fit with either TRW or Northrop. The business produces nearly two-thirds of TRW's annual revenues. 

The combination of Northrop and TRW would create a company with annual sales of $26 billion to $27 billion, excluding auto parts, Northrop said. The deal would merge TRW's aerospace and information businesses with Northrop's defense and commercial systems operations, which include information technology, nuclear and nonnuclear shipbuilding, and military electronics. 

Shares of TRW surged $11 to $50.80 in afternoon trade on the New York Stock Exchange. Northrop shares dropped $12.30, or 10 percent, to $105.60. 

TIMING 

"It makes great sense, the timing is lousy," said Jon Kutler, president of Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc.. 

Analysts called Northrop's move aggressive on two fronts. First, the offer came just two days after TRW's chief executive, David Cote, who masterminded a dramatic restructuring at the company, resigned to take the helm at Honeywell International HON.N. TRW shares fell about 10 percent following news of Cote's departure. 

TRW expressed regret at the timing of the Northrop proposal, saying it came "immediately following the unexpected departure of ... Cote, and the aberrationally low stock price that resulted." 

A Honeywell spokesman said Cote's move had "no connection" to Northrop's planned bid for TRW. 

Northrop's proposal also follows its completion of two acquisitions in the past year -- of Litton Industries and Newport News Shipbuilding -- that doubled its revenues and made it the world's largest builder of warships. 

"Northrop has an awful lot on its plate, digesting Litton and Newport News. But they've proven in the past that they won't let inconveniences stop them from going after targets of interest," Kutler said. 

"They are aggressive. They are opportunistic," he said. 

Last week Northrop officials touted their skills in integrating companies, with Chief Executive Kent Kresa calling it a "core" capability. The integration of Litton and Newport News has proceeded as planned, the company told investors. 

Northrop's buying power appears strong, analysts said, noting its stock has carried the highest price in the industry until it dropped following the offer for TRW. 

UPPING THE OFFER? 

Northrop said its tax-free $47-a-share offer represented a 22 percent premium over TRW's average share price in the last 12 months. Based on Thursday's closing price, Northrop is offering 0.398 of its shares for each TRW share. 

The offer was made public in a typical "bear hug" fashion in which Northrop's Kresa made public a letter to TRW management. Kresa said the companies had been talking for quite some time about a possible combination. 

In the letter, Northrop appeared to indicate it would consider raising its bid. "We would welcome the opportunity to consider non-public information concerning TRW, and we are prepared to consider in our offer any enhanced values that may be demonstrated by such information," it said. 

Northrop, which has 100,000 employees and operations in 25 countries, asked for an answer from TRW by Feb. 27. It said a definitive agreement could be reached by March 11 and a deal closed by the third quarter. It said it expected "minimal" antitrust problems. 

Separately Friday, Standard & Poor's said it may cut TRW's "BBB" corporate credit rating, citing "negative implications following Northrop Grumman Corp.'s announcement." S&P affirmed Northrop's "BBB-" rating. 

Ranked by the total value of contract awards, Lockheed Martin Corp. LMT.N was the top U.S. defense contractor last year; Boeing BA.N was No. 2; Northrop, combined with Newport News, was No. 3; TRW was No. 7. 

NEW YORK (Reuters) - Technology stocks fell on Friday under the weight of nagging worries over the strength of corporate profits and the soundness of accounting practices, but blue chips eked out gains as investors prowled for safer bets against a murky backdrop. 

"The market will be very volatile until people get more comfortable with financial reports," said Jon Burnham, who manages the $180 million Burnham Fund. 

The market has suffered a roller-coaster week of sudden rallies and sharp sell-offs as investors struggle to gauge the depth of accounting problems on Wall Street and the speed of a recovery in the nation's troubled economy. The technology-loaded Nasdaq is on track to close lower for the fourth straight week as investors opt for caution. 

J.P Morgan Chase & Co. JPM.N became the latest company pounded by accounting worries, while electronics retailer Circuit City Stores Inc. CC.N sank after a warning that served as another reminder of shrinking corporate earnings. 

Investors are nibbling at firms like diversified manufacturer Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. MMM.N amid hopes old-line businesses will offer some protection in the murky environment. 

The Nasdaq Composite Index .IXIC lost 7 points, or 0.43 percent, to 1,708. The broad Standard & Poor's 500 Index .SPX slipped 0.06 of a point, or 0.01 percent, to 1,080. 

The blue-chip Dow Jones industrial average .DJI rose 42 points, or 0.44 percent, to 9,877. 

News of a review by The Federal Reserve Bank of New York sent shares of J.P. Morgan Chase to a three-year low. The stock, the third-most active on the New York Stock Exchange, had dropped more than 6 percent to $26.70, a level unseen since October 1998. The Dow component bounced off its low, but was still off $1.59 at $27.55. 

Financial firms have been in the spotlight as investors try to gauge banks' exposure to bankrupt energy trader Enron Corp. ENRNQ.PK. Citigroup Inc. C.N, which has labored under these concerns in recent weeks, lost $1.05 to $41.75, and pressured the Dow. 

Computer Associates International Inc. CA.N slumped $2.71 to $16.10 and was the NYSE's most-active issue. Salomon Smith Barney cut its rating on the software maker to "neutral" from "buy" after the firm said it was being investigated by the U.S. Attorney's Office and the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 

Industrial and manufacturing stocks managed to buck the trend, helping hold the blue-chip Dow average above water. Minnesota Mining rose $1.55 to $117.55. Caterpillar Inc. CAT.N rose 22 cents to $52.10, while chemicals firm DuPont Co. DD.N gained 14 cents to $46.80. 

Circuit City slumped $7.28 to $16.31 and was the second most-active stock on the New York Stock Exchange. The No. 2 U.S. consumer electronics retailer said sales in January and February are running below its expectations, and remodeling and store relocations will shave earnings in 2002 and 2003. 

TRW Inc. TRW.N soared $10.30 to $50.10 after Northrop Grumman NOC.N, the world's largest builder of warships, said it planned to buy the aerospace and automotive group. Northrop Grumman slumped $10.80 to $107. 

Andrx Corp. ADRX.O sank $6.86 to $35.75 after Credit Suisse First Boston cuts its investment rating on the generic drug maker to "hold" from "buy" after the firm posted lower- than-expected quarterly earnings. 

BEA Systems Inc. BEAS.O tumbled $1.36 to $14.45, a day after the software company posted lower fiscal fourth-quarter net profit and said revenues for the current quarter would drop from the previous three months. 

