BEIJING - A Taiwanese soap opera that is a hit throughout East Asia has been banned by China as a threat to young minds.Chinese parents had complained about Meteor Garden, a romance set in an affluent Taiwanese high school, according to state media.The series began airing on some Chinese television stations last month but was banned Friday by the State Administration of Radio, Film and Television."This soap opera has made a negative effect on society, and especially misled young people," an agency spokeswoman said Tuesday.Meteor Garden centers on the romance between a poor girl and a member of a gang of rich kids at an elite high school in Taipei, the Taiwanese capital. Gang members wear expensive designer clothing and pick on fellow students with impunity.The newspaper Beijing Youth Daily complained that the series gives young viewers "unrealistic ideas about relations between people and society."State media did not specify the Chinese complaints. But Taiwanese newspapers have said Chinese parents objected to the drama's depiction of school violence and indulgence in brand-name goods and other extravagance.Meteor Garden draws large audiences in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Singapore and Taiwan. It started airing on television stations in the eastern Chinese city of Tianjin and the central province of Hubei last month.Tsai Chih-ping, producer of Meteor Garden, was quoted by the Taiwan newspaper United Daily News as saying the show is about young people growing up by learning from their mistakes."Many youngsters have gone through the same experience. We are most surprised by the ban," she was quoted as saying.The series is based on a Japanese comic book of the same name.The series still is available in China on pirated video discs.The ban highlights the conflict between China's growing appetite for imported pop culture and the Communist government's insistence on managing what its people see and hear.Taiwan accounts for a big share of the television, music and other pop culture imported by China.