
HARARE (Reuters) - Zimbabwe police shot at the convoy of opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai on Friday and two South African election observers were caught up in a separate attack by pro-government militants, the opposition party said. 

The incidents came as southern African observers warned that a wave of political violence threatened chances for a free and fair election on March 9-10. 

Tsvangirai, who poses the strongest challenge to President Robert Mugabe in 22 years of power, had stopped to greet supporters in a village about 43 miles from Masvingo when the shooting occurred. 

"Police today shot twice at Morgan Tsvangirai's convoy in Maringire village... No one was injured," said a spokesman for the opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC). 

Tsvangirai continued on to a political rally in Masvingo, where the MDC has a strong following in the city. Mugabe's supporters hold sway in the countryside. 

Police chief spokesman Wayne Bvudzijena said he was unaware of the incident but would make checks. A police spokesman in Masvingo also said he had heard of no incident. 

The run-up to the election has been marred by allegations of state-sponsored violence and intimidation. 


OBSERVERS WITNESS VIOLENCE 

In the first incident involving foreign election observers, two South Africans were holed up in an MDC office in the central town of Kwekwe by 200 pro-government militants armed with stones and iron bars. 

The head of the South African election mission Sam Motseunyane condemned the incident though the two members were not injured. Earlier reports had said the pair had been hurt during the attack. 

"We strongly condemn this act. This is totally unacceptable... It also confirms our firm belief that there is a need for the number of international observers to the presidential elections to be increased," Motseunyane said. 

The MDC said five of its supporters were injured in the attack. 

The South African Department of Foreign Affairs said that Zimbabwean police had arrested two youths in connection with the incident. 

South Africa and the 14-member Southern African Development Community (SADC) have the largest number of foreign observers in Zimbabwe since the European Union pulled out earlier this week and imposed sanctions on the Harare government. 

"It is vital that the political situation changes in a manner that will remove fear to enable the people to freely exercise their electoral rights," said Duke Lefoko, leader of the advance team for 50 parliamentary observers from the SADC. 

Lefoko, speaking in Harare ahead of the weekend arrival of the SADC team, said the observers would be deployed across Zimbabwe next week. 

The MDC says more than 100 of its supporters have been killed in political violence since February 2000 when militants loyal to Mugabe began invading white-owned farms. 

The government has denied responsibility for the violence and accused the opposition of fueling civil unrest. 


"WE ARE TAKING YOUR FARM" 

In the early hours of Friday, about 30 militants smashed through the security gate at James Ogden-Brown's farm near Chegutu, southwest of Harare, and ordered him off the land, a spokesman for the Commercial Farmers' Union (CFU) said. 

"They told him: 'Mr. Ogden-Brown...you have 30 minutes to leave. We are taking your farm'," the CFU spokesman said. 

The group then entered the farmhouse and seized six firearms. As the 35-year-old Ogden-Brown, his wife Cheryl and their two children packed their belongings, a group of farmers arrived on the scene after being alerted by radio. 

Some of the militants rushed to the farm gate and opened fire at the farmers, who fled. There were no injuries, but one car was hit by shotgun pellets, the CFU spokesman said. 

U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan has added his voice to growing international pressure on Zimbabwe's leaders to ensure the elections are free and fair. 

"For the sake of the people of Zimbabwe, of its neighbors and the entire continent of Africa, I appeal to the government to let the people make their choice, and to live by it," Annan said in a statement issued late on Thursday. 

Annan made no reference to European Union sanctions on Mugabe and his inner circle after the government refused to accredit the head of the EU observer team. 
MILAN (Reuters) - Four Tunisians, including a man alleged to be a leader of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network in Europe, were jailed for up to five years on Friday in Italy's first trial of terror suspects since September 11. 

The four were tried behind closed doors under a fast-track justice system and were found guilty of trading in false documents and of organizing illegal immigration, lawyers said. 

Because Italy had no laws covering international terrorism until September 11 none of the men faced terror charges, and defense lawyer Gianluca Maris told Reuters the Milan judge threw out charges that they had trafficked in arms, explosives and chemicals. 

No weapons or chemicals were ever found in their possession but police said wiretaps proved they were involved and Milan prosecutor Stefano Dambruoso said the court had acknowledged the men were connected to bin Laden. 

"This is the first sentence in Europe since September 11 that recognizes a European cell that had links with the international Islamic front of Osama bin Laden," Dambruoso said. 

A judicial source originally told reporters that the quartet were found guilty of chemicals and explosives trafficking, but lawyers later denied this. The court is due to publish its reasoning behind the verdicts at a later date. 

Among those convicted was Essid Sami Ben Khemais, whom police suspect was sent to Italy by bin Laden to supervise attacks in Europe, including a foiled bombing of the U.S. embassy in Rome in early 2001. 

The Tunisians were arrested in April and October 2001 and denied they were terrorists. They were not implicated in the September 11 strikes, which Washington blames on bin Laden. 

CYANIDE FEARS 

Friday's ruling came at the end of a week which shook Italy's sense of security after police in Rome swooped on a group of Moroccans found with a stash of a cyanide compound that experts said could have been used to make a deadly gas. 

Police have so far taken into custody six Moroccans and are searching for a seventh. 

They are suspected of planning a terrorist attack, possibly against the U.S. embassy in Rome, and investigators are working with the FBI to see if they had links with al Qaeda. 

Italy entered the spotlight in the fight against bin Laden after U.S. investigators said they believed Milan's Islamic cultural center was al Qaeda's main European logistics base. Muslim leaders in Italy have denied the charge. 

When police seized Khemais last year, the arrest warrant described him as a leader of the Italian arm of a European network of "terrorist groups inspired by fundamentalist Islam," with cells operating in Britain, France, Germany and Spain. 

He was jailed for five years on Friday, but his lawyer said he would appeal. He has already been condemned to 20 years in jail in Tunisia for belonging to a group tied to al Qaeda. 

Italian justice sources last year released transcripts of telephone conversations in which a man alleged to be Ben Khemais indicated he was planning chemical attacks in Europe. 

In one conversation, the man told a Libyan associate there was a plan to "try out" a drum of a "liquid" in France. 

"This liquid is more efficient because as soon as it opens, people are suffocated," Khemais allegedly said. 

The Tunisians sentenced on Friday chose the fast-track trial, allowing them to be tried with limited evidence and to serve a sentence of up to a third shorter than those who go through regular trials. 

Three other Tunisians arrested with them opted for the full trial and their case opened in a Milan court earlier this week. 
By Jeffrey Heller 
JERUSALEM (Reuters) - Gunmen killed an Israeli motorist and a supermarket customer shot dead a Palestinian bomber on Friday in violence that highlighted weak spots in Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan to create security zones. 
Sharon proposed "security separation" of Israel from the Palestinian territories on Thursday, but he left unanswered questions about the protection of dozens of settlements inside the West Bank and Gaza Strip. 
Secretary of State Colin Powell said on Friday the United States was concerned about a "serious escalation" in nearly 17 months of violence between the sides. 
"We are concerned. As soon as I get back to Washington, I'll spend a good part of the weekend re-engaging both sides," he told reporters aboard Air Force One returning from a trip to Asia with President Bush. 
The death toll has risen sharply this week as Israeli forces have launched retaliatory strikes by land, sea and air after a Palestinian attack that killed six soldiers on Tuesday. There was a lull in the Israeli raids on Friday. 
A government spokesman blamed the foiled suicide bombing in the West Bank settlement of Efrat on the Palestinian Authority and said it showed President Yasser Arafat was not sincere in his calls for an end to the bloodshed. 
Arafat, who denies such accusations, remained defiant in the West Bank city of Ramallah, where he outlined his vision of the day when there would be a Palestinian state with Arab East Jerusalem as its capital. 
"I'm sure that one of our sons, one of our daughters, will raise the flag of Palestine on all the mosques and all the churches inside the walls of Old Jerusalem," said Arafat, who has been confined to his headquarters by Israeli tanks. 
At least 889 Palestinians and 274 Israelis have been killed since the uprising began shortly after peace talks froze. 
SUICIDE IN A SUPERMARKET 
Witnesses said a Palestinian wearing a belt packed with explosives set off a small blast in the Efrat supermarket on Friday morning before being shot at close range by a customer. 
"A young guy...went to the area of the bakery. I heard a small explosion. People started running, and the guy himself, a young guy between 20 and 30 was running toward the exit of the store," supermarket owner Eli Shiran told Reuters. 
"At that point, somebody shot him. He fell on the floor, and he was trying to reach again toward his body...It seems to be he had another explosives belt on his body. 
"The guy, one of the clients, shot him again and the man died. Unfortunately one lady was hurt in the leg." 
In a separate incident, suspected Palestinian gunmen shot dead a 59-year-old Israeli motorist driving near the West Bank city of Ramallah, medics and the army said. 
Palestinian militants have frequently shot at Jewish settlers traveling on West Bank roads since a Palestinian uprising against occupation flared in September 2000. 
Militant leaders say they expect attacks on Israeli settlers and soldiers to increase in efforts to drive them out of the West Bank and Gaza, where Palestinians want their own state. 
"SECURITY SEPARATION" 
Sharon, under pressure after a series of bombings and ambushes, said in a nationally televised speech on Thursday that buffer zones against the Palestinians would protect Israelis -- a move that drew cries of outrage from Palestinian officials. 
Such measures would pose a security headache for many of the 145 communities Israel has planted in lands it captured in a 1967 war that are home to three million Palestinians. 
Palestinian Information Minister Yasser Abed Rabbo condemned Sharon's plan as an attempt to "create jails for the Palestinian people within their cities, towns and villages." 
Sharon gave no precise details about the construction of barriers and other defenses likely to take months to complete. 
Arie Mekel, an Israeli government spokesman, said the Efrat incident reinforced Sharon's opposition to conducting peace talks with the Palestinians while their uprising continued. 
"Arafat continues to make speeches about peace...(while) Palestinian terrorists continue to enter our supermarkets, our buses, our streets and do their utmost to try and kill Israelis," he said. 
But in a sign that both sides were keeping open a dialogue, the army said Israeli and Palestinian security officials met on Thursday and "agreed on various ways to achieve a cease-fire." Palestinian officials said another meeting was set for Sunday. 
The army also said Israeli troops had withdrawn overnight from an area seized a week ago near the Jewish settlement of Kfar Darom in central Gaza and lifted blockades imposed on Tuesday that had divided the Strip into three parts. 
A poll published on Friday in the Yedioth Ahronoth newspaper said Sharon's credibility in the eyes of Israelis had dropped to 54 percent in February from 70 percent in December. 
"What we wanted to hear was...how Sharon intends to achieve calm. Sharon has no answers to that question," commentator Sima Kadmon wrote in Yedioth Ahronoth, referring to the speech. 

