Geobiology lessons: Oxygen not required Rock-dwelling organisms may hold key to extraterrestrial life BOSTON - Bacteria are the real rocks of ages. Long before trees, oceans and animals arrived to blanket Earth's surface, microorganisms had the place all to themselves. So they learned to get along with their only companions - the rocks. James Staley / University of Washington Desert varnish, the black material coating these rocks near Phoenix, could be produced by bacteria, some scientists think. Living organisms may literally shape the rocks around us, scientists have found. This growing realization has spawned a new subdiscipline of science: "geobiology," the study of how animals and rocks interact. The chief architects of that interaction are microorganisms. "They're the one group of organisms we could not do without," says Abigail Salyers, president of the American Society for Microbiology. New studies, reported this month in Boston at a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, reveal links between organisms and the rocks that host them. Some researchers are taking their work to extremes, to the bottom of the ocean or underground, to see how rocks and animals interact under unusual conditions. Other scientists are finding ways to identify the presence of living things in rocks - which may help the search for life on other planets or their moons. A few researchers, including Dr. Salyers, even worry whether enthusiastic geobiologists might dredge up a disease-causing microbe from deep below ground - a sort of Andromeda strain for the 21st century. For most of Earth's 4.5 billion-year history, bacteria were the only players in town. They had arrived by at least 3.8 billion years ago, says microbiologist Norman Pace of the University of Colorado. The first plants and animals didn't show up until billions of years later. With all that time to evolve, bacteria spread to fill nearly every ecological niche on the planet. They can live in scalding-hot ponds, frigid underwater crevices, even inside solid rock. "When conditions get tough, the last place life goes is inside the rocks," says Kenneth Nealson of the University of Southern California. Microbes survive by squeezing into fractures or pore spaces. Recently scientists announced finding a group of bacteria living off hydrogen 650 feet underground in Idaho. And last week, researchers reported that some microbes can survive even when squished at pressures equivalent to those experienced 31 miles underground. Scientists at the Carnegie Institution of Washington squeezed bacteria between two tiny diamonds. Roughly 1 percent of the bacteria survived even at the highest pressure, the team reported in Science. Some researchers think that the first life forms may have begun underground, where they would have been shielded from the harsh conditions of the young Earth. With no protective atmosphere in place, the microbes would have been pelted with radiation from the sun and meteorites from space. Microorganisms learned to survive on simple chemicals for energy, Dr. Nealson says. He studies a modern bacterium, called Shewanella, that eats and breathes rocks. It gets its energy by consuming hydrogen and formic acid. It "breathes" by stealing electrons from manganese or iron oxide. Laboratory experiments have shown that heating Shewanella with an iron oxide leaves behind a telltale chemical signature of the bacterium's presence. "To my knowledge this is the first evidence of how to tell a living rock from a dead rock," says Dr. Nealson, who also directs the Center for Life Detection at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Such work could help the search for life elsewhere in the solar system, such as on Mars. Researchers haven't been able to agree on whether the chemistry of a famous Martian meteorite, known as ALH 84001, really indicates that life once existed in it. Scientists need to develop a foolproof set of criteria for detecting signs of life, Dr. Nealson says. Those criteria can't assume that extraterrestrial life will resemble humans - carbon-based and oxygen-breathing, he says. E.T. might turn out to be a slimy, iron-munching microbe. That prospect also excites James Staley, a microbiologist at the University of Washington. He has been looking at an unremarkable Earth phenomenon that may yield remarkable insights into extraterrestrial life - the black "desert varnish" that coats rocks left out in arid climates. Desert varnish is rich in iron and manganese oxides, the very minerals some microbes love to munch. It forms a thin layer, less than a millimeter thick, on the surface of durable rocks. (In the Southwest, American Indians sometimes carved through it to create petroglyphs.) Some scientists think that desert varnish might be created by the action of bacteria, while others see it as having no connection to life. "If we can't figure this out on Earth, how are we going to do it on Mars?" asks Dr. Staley. Pictures of Mars taken by robotic spacecraft and satellites show dark coatings on rocks that look similar to Earthly desert varnish. Dr. Staley scraped the black goo off four desert rocks and analyzed it for amino acids, the chemicals that link into chains to form proteins. He found 15 amino acids, in ratios consistent with those commonly formed by bacteria. The work doesn't prove that desert varnish is always created by bacteria, he notes, but it suggests that the two may be related. "We're quite excited about this," Dr. Staley said at the Boston meeting. In the meantime, his University of Washington colleague, microbiologist David Stahl, has been trying to show whether bacteria can spread long distances even while living deep inside rocks. Dr. Stahl takes bacteria from deep wells in eastern Washington, which were originally drilled for getting rid of hazardous waste. When the drillers hit underground water, they had to stop and drill elsewhere. But scientists moved in to study the microorganisms living in these isolated, deep-water systems. The bacteria, collected at depths between 1,000 and 4,200 feet, get their energy from sulfur compounds. (The bacteria breathe out hydrogen sulfide, the compound with the rotten-egg smell.) Such organisms may be very similar to some of the earliest life forms on Earth, billions of years ago, Dr. Stahl says. Genetic studies showed that the bacteria are similar to those found in deep wells in southern Africa, as well as those in hot springs at Yellowstone National Park. Together the findings show that microbes can spread across the planet, even when buried, Dr. Stahl says. Some researchers have questioned whether drilling to bring these organisms up is a good idea. Too little is known about them, these scientists argue. Dr. Salyers, a microbiologist at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, worries whether a microbe that might be perfectly harmless in the ground could cause disease in humans if brought to the surface. The chances are very small, she says, but scientists need to be aware of the risks. "We've ventured into a realm that people are only beginning to think about," she says. She points out that many emerging infectious diseases, such as Legionnaires' disease, are caused by microbes that used to coexist peacefully with humans. Altering the environment, by actions such as introducing air conditioning, can turn a harmless microbe into a disease-causing one, Dr. Salyers says. Space missions that are scheduled to bring back rock samples from another world must take precautions not to unleash microbes from inside the rocks, she says. Even if they don't cause disease in humans, the microorganisms could invade Earth's ecosystem like an exotic species and upset the ecological balance. NASA has worried about this problem for a long time. The Apollo missions, for instance, quarantined the moon rocks. And NASA has even appointed a "planetary protection officer," John Rummel, whose job is to think of every possible Andromeda strain scenario and find a way to prevent it. But some scientists think the concern is overstated. Many of the most bizarre microbes grow only in bizarre conditions, says Edward DeLong of the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute in Moss Landing, Calif. Dr. DeLong studies bacteria that live around scalding-hot vents on the seafloor. These microbes don't even start to grow and reproduce unless they are nearly boiling, he points out. "They are more likely to be our allies than our enemies," he says. 