By Ibon Villelabeitia 
SAN VICENTE, Colombia (Reuters) - Helicopters dropped crack Colombian troops into a former rebel enclave on Friday under sporadic machine-gun fire, but there was no showdown on the ground as all but a few of the leftist guerrillas were already gone. 
The arrival of the Black Hawk choppers in the steamy southern savanna -- deserted but for grazing cows -- came a day after warplanes bombed rebel positions to close down the safe haven ceded to FARC in 1998 to encourage peace talks. 
Around 900 troops from the army's Rapid Deployment Force swarmed off the choppers into a former military base just outside the town of San Vicente, where an earlier contingent of parachutists had landed. 
A furious President Andres Pastrana said on Wednesday he would force the "terrorist" Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia out of the Switzerland-sized chunk of ranch land and jungle. The rebel group, known by the Spanish initials FARC, had hours earlier hijacked a commercial plane and kidnapped a senator on board in an audacious attack that brought an abrupt end to three years of fruitless negotiations to resolve Colombia's bitter 38-year-old war. 
Armed with assault rifles, grenade launchers and machine guns, the first U.S.-trained troops landing in the enclave -- where rebel leaders had lorded it over locals in permanent camps with satellite TV, Internet and flashy four-wheel drives -- were "eager to fight," said one soldier, Carmona Marin. 
Armed forces chief Fernando Tapias said three helicopters were hit by anti-aircraft machine-gun fire and one pilot and two other crew members were injured. He could not confirm media reports that up to seven civilians were killed and 15 injured in bombing raids against rebel positions on Thursday. 
The first contingent of troops landed at 1 a.m. and two others followed, the army said. 
"Reinforcements are going to be arriving all day," said army spokesman Captain Omar Acosta. A mine-sweeping team was also en route, he said. 
But the guerrillas, as expected, made no attempt to resist the heavily armed troops and melted into the surrounding jungle long before they arrived. 
The armed forces, which long had wanted to push into the FARC zone, dubbed their invasion "Operation Thanatos" after the ancient Greek mythical personification of death. 
FARC RESPONSE AWAITED 
Although the collapse of peace talks to resolve a war pitting leftist rebels against the armed forces and far-right paramilitary outlaws took Colombia back to where it was three years ago, Pastrana said the country's military was now much sharper and more sophisticated. 
The United States, which says it "understands and supports" Pastrana's decision to send the army in, has poured more than $1 billion in mostly military aid into his Plan Colombia, which aims to smash the drugs trade in the world's cocaine capital. 
Peace talks did little to stem bloodshed here anyway, and most of the FARC's 17,000 fighters had kept up their guerrilla outside their territory -- which Pastrana accused them of using to hide kidnap victims, run a cocaine business and train. 
Some 12,000 Colombian troops massed around the 16,000 square-mile zone that had been off-limits to police, military, and state institutions for three years. 
The rebels are now expected to fan out and escalate their guerrilla war, likely targeting cities in an upsurge of violence before May 26 presidential elections. 
Overnight, suspected FARC rebels attacked electricity installations in southern Colombia, leaving many areas without power or telephone services. A gas pipeline near the western city of Medellin was also blown up. 
Hard-liner Alvaro Uribe, who was the peace talks' fiercest critic, is far ahead of his rivals in opinion polls. 
The government said there would be no overnight military victory over the FARC and the country overall remained calm. The army reported fewer armed clashes than usual. 
Financial markets were also muted as the military push into the enclave gradually unfolded. 
"I'm really proud to be with the first to come in ... We're ready for anything," said soldier Henry Bocanegra as his unit awaited orders for what was expected to be a triumphant entry into San Vicente town, 4 miles (7 km) beyond the base. 

PARAMILITARY REPRISALS FEARED 
Locals scanned the skies as the Black Hawks flew in. But after a tense night, when planes and helicopters rumbled low overhead for hours and a power cut blacked out the town, life went on as normal for San Vicente's 25,000 residents. 
Dusty roads were abuzz with motorcycles, bikes and horse-drawn carts. Music blared from brothels and a peasant herded goats in the street. 
The army broadcast messages over local radio assuring locals "we are your army. We're here to help and defend you." 
But many of the 100,000 residents of the former enclave feared the FARC's exit would open the door to attacks by paramilitaries, suspected by some human groups of being in league with sections of the military. 
"There's a lot of fear that the paramilitaries will come and they won't respect human rights," said vendor John Mendez. 

