ARUSHA, Tanzania - A trial is unfolding far from the spotlight in this East African town, but its outcome may one day ring out around the world. It is the trial of three journalists and it focuses on the question, can freedom of speech degenerate into genocide? Or put differently, can journalism kill?According to prosecutors of the U.N. war crimes tribunal for Rwanda, the answer to both questions is a forceful yes.The three men in the dock, all former Rwandan media executives, stand accused of genocide and incitement to genocide through their use of radio broadcasts and newspapers.Their trial also is examining the full scope of the role played by the media in the massacre of more than 800,000 people in Rwanda in 1994.It is the first time since Julius Streicher, the Nazi publisher of the anti-Semitic weekly Der Sturmer, appeared before the Nuremberg judges in 1946 that a group of journalists stands accused before an international tribunal on such grave charges.Prosecutors have drawn stark parallels between the vitriolic campaigns against the Jews by Der Sturmer before World War II and the actions of some Rwandan media organizations before and during the 1994 slaughter of the Tutsi."A key question will be what kind of speech is protected and where the limits lie," said Stephen Rapp, an American lawyer and the senior prosecutor. "It is important to draw that line. We hope the judgment will give the world some guidance."National laws vary, and as for international legal standards, "there has been no decision since Nuremberg," Rapp said. At Nuremberg, Stricher was sent to the gallows.The accused in what is informally called here "the media trial" are Ferdinand Nahimana and Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, who the prosecutors say founded and controlled a Rwandan radio station and directed its news coverage, and Hassan Ngeze, a former newspaper publisher and editor. Prosecutors charge that all three were part of a well-prepared plan to use their outlets first to spread ethnic hatred and then to persuade people to kill their enemies, the Tutsi and moderate Hutu. That required demonizing the Tutsi, prosecutors said, and the media played a key role in accomplishing this.To make their case, prosecutors have armed themselves with 50,000 documents, more than 600 audiotapes of what they say are inflammatory broadcasts from Radio Mille Collines and stacks of copies from the pictorial newspaper Kangura, peppered with vicious cartoons and nasty texts.Defense lawyers have rejected the genocide charges, and the defendants have pleaded innocent. John Floyd, an American lawyer defending Ngeze, denounced the indictments as a "vulgar farce" and "dangerous stuff."