EDWARD ALBEE'S new play "The Goat, or Who Is Sylvia?" is something of a mystery, or at least it will remain a mystery until it opens on Broadway on March 10. The first advertisement appeared recently, with a formal portrait of a dignified family. They are posing for posterity under the words "Meet the Grays": husband and wife and son (his hand resting on his father's shoulder) and goat.

Goat? What is that goat - cute, gentle- looking - doing there? Mr. Albee's response is equivalent to the one given by his character George in "Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?": "That's for me to know and you to find out." 

The photo was his idea. Other suggestions made by representatives from the advertising agency, he said, assumed that people had already seen the play. "I thought it would be provocative to have a goat in the family portrait," he said. "The goat is in the middle of the family."

When asked what the play is about, he is guarded in his answer: "The limits of our tolerance." Advance readers (including this writer) know the specifics of the story, as, of course, will all those who see the play. But for the moment, the playwright wants to keep a secret. In any case, let it be said that love is a two-way street.
Sara Krulwich/The New York Times
Mercedes Ruehl and Bill Pullman, above, in Edward Albee's new play "The Goat, or Who Is Sylvia?"
Arts & Leisure (Feb. 17, 2002)
Join a Discussion on Theater


Since 1994 and "Three Tall Women," his third Pulitzer Prize-winning play, Mr. Albee has been in a highly creative phase of his career, and this season is the most productive of them all. He has two new plays opening within weeks of each other. In addition to "The Goat," with Bill Pullman and Mercedes Ruehl at the Golden Theater, "Occupant," his play about Louise Nevelson (starring Anne Bancroft) is Off Broadway at the Signature Theater, where it opens next Sunday. At the same time, there is a rare revival of "All Over" at the McCarter Theater in Princeton, N.J., which opened Friday. 

Asked how he felt about such an abundance of Albee, the playwright said it was simply a coincidence. With "The Goat" already scheduled for Broadway, he had promised a play to Signature for its celebratory 10th season. About "All Over," he said, "Once you have two, why not three?"

On a recent Saturday morning, sitting in his bright, spacious loft in TriBeCa - the walls and floors filled with his favorite art, primitive and modern, including a sculpture and a drawing by Nevelson - Mr. Albee, who will be 74 in March, talked about the plays and other matters, including his recent heart problem. 

Over a period of several months, while a new elevator was being installed in his building in place of the old freight elevator, he had to walk up five flights, and he found himself repeatedly stopping to rest - unusual for him, considering that he exercises regularly. A cardiologist said that he might need to have heart surgery, and Mr. Albee responded that he had several plays opening and wondered if it could be postponed until May. The doctor said, "I wouldn't do that if I were you." 

Heeding the warning, he researched his medical problem and then checked into the hospital. It turned out that only one artery was blocked, so he underwent angioplasty rather than surgery. He watched the procedure as it was in progress, part of his theory that one should participate fully in as many areas of one's life as possible. "It was as if I was watching Channel 13," he said. The next morning, he left the hospital and went back to work. Now in his loft he took out a photograph of his heart - before and after - demonstrating that the procedure was a success. Although he is not one to display prizes or mementos in his home, this is one photo he may frame.

That weekend, he was even more peripatetic than usual. Saturday evening, he went to a runthrough of "Occupant" for an invited audience. The next morning, he was at a reading of the first two of the three scenes in "The Goat," and in the afternoon he took a train to Princeton, to watch Rosemary Harris, Michael Learned and Myra Carter (all three experienced Albee actresses) in a runthrough of "All Over."

Although there is a commonality of themes and motifs in Mr. Albee's plays - broken marriages, lost and abandoned children - he is unpredictable in his artistic choices. Each new play represents the playwright in a different but characteristic mode. "The Goat" is a family play with dark undercurrents, a comedy edging into tragedy. "Occupant" is a biographical portrait of an artist, a two-character play in which Nevelson is brought to life as she is questioned by an interviewer. 

Expanding on his original statement about "The Goat," he said: "Every civilization sets quite arbitrary limits to its tolerances. The play is about a family which is deeply rocked by an unimaginable event and how they solve that problem."

The theme is one that has fascinated him for years. Initially, he thought about writing a play dealing with a doctor who has been working with AIDS patients and intentionally infects himself with the virus in order to understand how they feel. Would the doctor be praised for his daring or would he become a pariah in his community? When Mr. Albee learned that Austin Pendleton had written a play, "Uncle Bob," on that subject, he abandoned the project. But the premise lingered in his mind. "I kept thinking about it and suddenly, one day, about a year later, the lightbulb flashed. Obviously my unconscious had been trying to find something else, and I came up with `The Goat.' "

In the play, the husband (Mr. Pullman) is happily married (to Ms. Ruehl) and is a prize-winning architect. In common with the doctor in Mr. Albee's unwritten play, he is at the top of his profession. Because of his new obsession, he sees his world collapsing.

In talking, but not talking, about the subject matter, Mr. Albee said that it could have been another controversial situation - sexual, political, tribal. It is his hope that "people will think afresh about whether or not all the values they hold are valid." In his own case, he said, "I tend to have ambivalences about all of our absolutisms."

He has no ambivalence about Nevelson, a close friend who was a self-dramatizing figure in the art world. Putting aside a play in progress called "I Think Back Now on André Gide," he thought back on Nevelson. For many years he had considered her a suitable subject for a play. Last summer at his home in Montauk on Long Island, in relatively quick time, he wrote "Occupant." It is a play about the artist's process of self- creation, and follows the transformation of the Russian immigrant Leah Berliawsky into Louise Nevelson, the celebrated American artist.
BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. - Mark Canton, in his fourth day on the job as chief executive of Artists Production Group, the moviemaking offshoot of Michael Ovitz's Artists Management Group, sat at one end of the coffee table. Joel Gotler, head of A.M.G./Renaissance, the company's literary division, sat at the other. "O.K.," Mr. Canton said, "Pitch me. I've only got a few minutes." 

The office was nearly bare, outlines of pictures on walls left unpainted since the departure of the previous occupant. In his three decades in the movie business, Mr. Canton had been president of production at Warner Brothers by age 29 and chairman of Sony's Columbia-TriStar Pictures by 39. Now, at 52, a half-dozen years after being fired by Sony, followed by four years as an independent producer, here he was, back in the mogul game. 

Mr. Gotler started in: "Chasing the Dime" was a new thriller from Michael Connelly, about a computer scientist ("Ben Affleck, Matt Damon, whoever you want") who suddenly finds himself caught in webs of betrayal. There are plot twists, double-crosses, triple-crosses. 

"This could be a good George Clooney," Mr. Canton said. Mr. Gotler nodded readily. 

"O.K., enough," Mr. Canton said, catching Mr. Gotler in mid-sentence, only a few minutes into the pitch. "It's O.K. We want it. Go make the deal." 

Five days later there was the announcement in the Hollywood trade papers: MGM had optioned the rights to make a film based on the book. A few days after that, the Artists Production Group announced a development deal for a romantic comedy called "Nothing But the Truth," and a few days later came word that Michael Apted was in talks to direct "Tell No One," yet another of the group's projects from an author, Harlan Coben, represented by Renaissance.
Misha Erwitt for The New York Times
Mark Canton is reprising his movie mogul role, this time as chief executive of Artists Production Group. The group is part of Michael Ovitz's empire, which has yet to establish a clear identity. 
  Films Sheperded by Mark Canton

"I did not come here to be patient," said Mr. Canton. 

Studio chiefs have a notoriously short shelf life in Hollywood, greedily fawned over during their years in the spotlight and then shunned once an inevitable box-office downturn sends them packing. You can see some of them around town, ghostlike, scrambling to put together independent production slates and perhaps even find their way back into some studio's corner office. 

What is so interesting about the story of Mark Canton - whose tenure atop two studios had been both controversial and emblematic of studio successes and excesses over the last two decades - is that his is an increasingly rare example of a former studio chief getting a second chance at the top, as a partner in Mr. Ovitz's production company. 

The Artists Production Group, one of the most closely watched and whispered-about ventures in Hollywood, is an attempt by Mr. Ovitz, the former uber-agent, to mix a talent and literary management agency with a film and television production company that was unveiled three years ago with great fanfare but has produced more speculation than actual projects. 

"Nobody can really figure out what A.M.G. is yet," said one major studio executive. "Are they even going to survive as an entity?" 

Critics point to the failure last year of A.M.G.'s television production spinoff, A.T.G., which failed in two seasons to produce a single network hit. Early on, much of the company's attention was focused on those television efforts, perhaps part of the reason that the company has also been sluggish in movie production, having shot just three films and having only one of them released ("Sidewalks of New York," which bombed). 

Mr. Ovitz shrugs off such concerns. "We've been in business here for only three years," he said. "This is not a fast-results business. To come up with really interesting material, that takes time. Now, we're starting to get drafts of scripts in, and they're coming in good. So we needed to get someone who had a really deep background in running a company that has this kind of volume." 

Still, skepticism runs high about the long-run viability of Mr. Ovitz's ambitious network of companies. 

"I'm not unaware, I'm not in denial," Mr. Canton said. "Things have not happened as quickly as some would want. But you have to look at what Mike Ovitz has accomplished in his career, not at what he hasn't accomplished." 

The reality, which may not be apparent from outside the company, he said, is that the production group has more than four dozen projects in serious development, and more than a dozen fresh ones that Mr. Canton brought with him from his former independent production company. 

"My job is to get these projects into the end zone," Mr. Canton said, "and quickly." 

He points to a roster of major clients in the company's management division, including directors like Martin Scorsese and authors like Tom Clancy and Michael Crichton, as well as more than 60 movie projects in an advanced stage of development. 

"There is business to be done here," Mr. Canton said. "Real business."

A.P.G. is 19 months into a three-year, $200 million deal with Studio Canal, the French studio, that provides development and production financing for films that would be distributed overseas, although it has yet to result in a finished movie. One of Mr. Canton's first meetings as chairman was with Studio Canal executives, and he said he is determined to get movies into production as part of the deal. 

"If they are truly serious about making a lot of movies, then Mark is a guy who can make it happen for them," said one top agent from another company. "He has great talent relationships and knows how this is done." 

Both Mr. Canton and Mr. Ovitz said they were well aware that with the purchase of Universal Pictures by Vivendi, the French conglomerate that also owns Studio Canal, the dynamic may have shifted. Discussion of A.P.G.'s future, they say, may include a deal with one of the major Hollywood studios to distribute much of A.P.G.'s output. "It is vitally important," Mr. Canton said, "That we get our financing in place."

Dressed in designer black, with his trademark round glasses bisecting a triangular face, Mr. Canton stared out the windows of his new downtown Beverly Hills office toward the "Hollywood" sign shimmering in the distance. "Not a bad view," he said. "I like being in this part of town, but basically I'm a studio rat. It takes a lot for me to get away from the smell of a sound stage." 
Own Terms

By DANA KENNEDY
 
Elliott Marks/IFC Films
Debra Winger and Arliss Howard, married in real life, play a divorced couple in "Big Bad Love."
  Video: Trailer for 'Big Bad Love'
Arts & Leisure (Feb. 17, 2002)
Join a Discussion on Movies -- A Moderated Forum

EBRA WINGER and her husband, Arliss Howard, are accustomed to questions about why Ms. Winger left the movie business six years ago. And they have a good answer as to how Mr. Howard, the star and director of Ms. Winger's new comeback film, "Big Bad Love," lured his wife back into acting.

He promised her a Highland cow.

Ms. Winger, who has spent time in Scotland, spotted the animals there and fell in love. "They looked like loaves of bread from far away," Mr. Howard recalls. "So finally I said, after everything else had failed to get her to be in the movie, I will get you a Highland cow."

The revelation, 100 percent true or not, is a rare moment of levity during a recent interview in Manhattan with Ms. Winger, 46, and Mr. Howard, 47, who met during the filming of "Wilder Napalm" in 1991 and were married in 1996. They live in Westchester County, in a riverfront house with his son Sam, 14, by a previous marriage, her son Noah, 14, from her first marriage, to the actor Timothy Hutton, and their son, Babe, 4.

Mr. Howard, in addition to starring in "Big Bad Love," also wrote the screenplay (with his brother James) and is the director. The film, which opens on Friday, is based on a book of short stories by the Mississippi writer Larry Brown. Mr. Howard plays Barlow, an embittered Vietnam vet with a drinking problem who is trying to make it as a writer. Ms. Winger, who plays Barlow's ex-wife, Marilyn, also ended up producing the movie by default when financing ran out at the last minute. The cast and crew were already on location in Holly Springs, Miss., and 12 days into filming, so Mr. Howard and Ms. Winger were faced with either abandoning the project or producing it themselves.

Ms. Winger says she was drawn to "Big Bad Love" after years of resisting Mr. Howard's entreaties to read more Southern literature. Mr. Howard is a native of Missouri. But Ms. Winger, who was born in Ohio, says she has always felt more like a "Yankee." Until filming began in Mississippi, Ms. Winger says, it was "very hard to get me south of the Mason-Dixon line."

The movie received mixed reviews at last year's Cannes International Film Festival. Ms. Winger's role in the film is smaller than her husband's, but her character is the one to be reckoned with.

The same is true in real life. At first, Ms. Winger so dominates the conversation that it seems that Mr. Howard, hunched over a plate of food, will never say a word. Only when a specific request is made does he start to talk.

Angie Dickinson, who plays Barlow's mother in the film, observed the couple on the set. "She's the forceful one, and he nods," Ms. Dickinson says. "He's not a guy's guy, he's very gentle. But he's far from a milquetoast. The nodding isn't `Yes, dear," it's more like, `You're doing what I want.' "

Mr. Howard, whose work includes supporting roles in movies as varied as Stanley Kubrick's "Full Metal Jacket" and "Johns," a 1996 film starring David Arquette as a male prostitute, says he was moved enough by the Larry Brown stories to visualize them on the screen . Right about the same time, a little more than seven years ago, Mr. Howard says, he was approached by various people in the film industry people who suggested he try directing.

Mr. Howard's decision to develop "Big Bad Love" into a movie coincided somewhat with Ms. Winger's decision to leave show business after nearly two decades and three Oscar nominations. (Her last screen role was the poorly received romantic comedy "Forget Paris," with Billy Crystal, in 1995.) But she is adamant that it is "show business" she disliked and left, not acting.

"I worked as an actress," she says, pointing out several plays she has been in. Ms. Winger co-starred with Mr. Howard in the American Repertory Theater's 1998 production of "How I Learned to Drive" in Cambridge, Mass. They teamed up again in 1999 for the company's production of "Ivanov." She also had a teaching fellowship for a year at Harvard under the psychiatrist Robert Coles. She taught a course called The Literature of Social Reflection. 

Ms. Winger insists there was no precipitating event that led to her departure from film. But it didn't help that a movie she was set to make with Marlon Brando and Johnny Depp called "Divine Rapture" fell apart when the financial backing dried up just three weeks after shooting began in Ireland in late 1995. Ms. Winger admits it was a disappointment but says it was not the only reason she left.

"I just had diminishing returns on my investment," she says. "People like to say, `What was it, who did it?' But it's never one thing. Different things had either broken my heart or just been debilitating. And some things had been amazingly positive. Like I got to do "Shadowlands" and "Dangerous Woman" in one year. Those were a dream for me."

Ms. Winger says she experienced a number of "seminal events" in her life, including her mother's death in 1996. Of her movie roles, she says: "I was not engaged in the way that I wanted to be, to put in what I put in. It just seemed to me, like because you've been doing it all your life, do you automatically keep doing it?"

Mr. Howard says people respond with "disbelief and contempt" when they hear Ms. Winger tell why she quit. "Debra walked away when she was at the top of her game, so people want to say she turned this age and so there wasn't the material coming in, which isn't true," he says. "For someone to walk away from stardom, ultimately people get irritated when they think about it."

The actress Rosanna Arquette, who plays the girlfriend of Mr. Howard's best friend (Paul Le Mat) in "Big Bad Love," says she, too, wondered what happened to Debra Winger, even before she was hired for the movie. After turning 40, Ms. Arquette says, she found it hard to get work and thought Ms. Winger might have had the same experience.

After she got the part in "Big Bad Love," Ms. Arquette decided to make a documentary about what happens to Hollywood actresses over 40. The finished film, which includes interviews with dozens of actresses, including Daryl Hannah, Frances McDormand, Melanie Griffith, Anjelica Huston and Jane Fonda, is titled "Searching for Debra Winger," and Ms. Arquette hopes to show it at Cannes this spring. 

