Feds probe state's organ donation rate Arizonans are dying needlessly every week, in part because the state has one of the lowest rates of organ donation in the nation.Arizona's slump in organ donation has spurred federal regulators to investigate whether the Donor Network of Arizona, the state's group supervising the process, is failing in its role.Even the head of the group, Jack Cremin, is baffled.Arizona's rate is the fifth lowest in the nation. Last year, 130 Arizonans died waiting for hearts, livers or other organs.Two complaints have been filed against the Donor Network of Arizona. A representative of the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services is in Arizona this week investigating the network. Depending on the findings, the network could be decertified and lose its federal funding.Doctors warn of cancer drug dangersLife-saving treatment could cause other ailments, study saysLONDON, Feb. 22 - More men with testicular cancer are beating the illness, but doctors warned Friday that the life-saving treatments could increase their risk of developing heart disease and kidney problems.       MOST MEN who survive testicular cancer lead normal lives, but "patients should be made aware that they might have a greater risk of developing cardiovascular disease than of suffering a recurrence of their cancer or a second malignancy," said Dr. Max Scheulen of the West German Cancer Center at the University of Essen.       In a study of 32 men who had been treated with chemotherapy drugs for testicular cancer up to 17 years earlier, Scheulen and a colleague, Dr. Dirk Strumberg, discovered that patients had secondary hormonal and metabolic changes that could play a role in the development of heart disease.       Testicular cancer is most common among young and middle-age men. It is curable in most cases. All of the men in the study had been treated with cisplatin and        Nearly a third of the men in the study had an abnormal functioning in the left ventricle of the heart, according to the research, published in the journal Annals of Oncology. More than 80 percent had raised cholesterol levels, and a quarter had high blood pressure after chemotherapy. 			       Almost a quarter also had some hearing loss, and more than a third had problems with nerve damage. But none developed new cancers.       "Our study demonstrated that patients cured by cisplatin-based combination chemotherapy were generally well and living a normal social life," Scheulen said.       But he said men should be aware of the heart disease risk so they could takes measures to minimize it, such as controlling their weight, regulating their blood pressure and cholesterol levels, and not smoking.       KIDNEY IMPLICATIONS ALSO FOUND       In a separate study, Dr. Sophie Fossa of Norwegian Radium Hospital in Oslo found that testicular cancer survivors also may suffer kidney problems that can increase with age.       Twenty-five of 85 former cancer patients she studied had long-term renal problems, particularly if they received both chemotherapy and radiotherapy.       "The consequence is that doctors seeing patients with testicular cancer who have had radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy must be aware of subclinical renal damage even years after treatment because in some patient the damage may become clinically relevant - for example during any treatment with drugs that are eliminated by the kidneys," Fossa said in a statement.              (c) 2002 Reuters Limited. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Reuters content is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters.Study shows bologna, hot dogs elevate type 2 risks in menWASHINGTON, Feb 26 - Eat too many hot dogs and they may bite you back. A study shows that a diet heavy in processed meats, including hot dogs and bacon, increases the risk of type 2 diabetes by about 50 percent in men, researchers say.Diabetes contributes to the deaths of almost 200,000 Americans annually. A GROUP OF HARVARD SCHOOL of Public Health researchers analyzed the dietary habits of thousands of men and found that those who frequently ate bacon, hot dogs, sausage, bologna or other processed meats were 46 percent more likely to develop type 2 diabetes than men who less of the food. High-fat dairy products were also implicated.       "We are not proposing to ban hot dogs - it is just a matter of moderation," said Dr. Frank B. Hu, senior author of the study appearing this week in the journal Diabetes Care. "People should reduce the frequency of eating processed meats."       Hu said that big increase in risk for diabetes 2 came among those who ate the processed meats five times or more per week. For some, it was every day. 	       "That's too much," he said. "We should change that eating pattern."       Diabetes Care is a peer-reviewed journal published by the American Diabetes Association.       The data in the research came from the Health Professionals Follow-Up Study, a project that started in 1986 by collecting dietary information from 42,504 men, aged 40 to 75, who were healthy - free of diabetes, heart disease or cancer.       The men in the study were followed for 12 years and the researchers compared the dietary pattern of those who developed type 2 diabetes with those who did not. Hu said the results were adjusted for the known effects of such things as smoking, obesity, fat intake and physical activity. After these adjustments, he said, it was clear that eating lots of hot dogs and other processed meats was an independent risk factor for diabetes.       "Eating processed meats five times or more per week is where we saw the major difference," said Hu. "The effect is dose related - the more you eat of these foods, the higher the risk."       WEAKNESS IN STUDY       Hu said that the risk of diabetes may be affected by other foods often consumed in meals featuring processed meats. People seldom eat hot dogs or bologna or bacon alone - the meats usually are accompanied by high fat condiments, such as mayonnaise, and side dishes like French fries and potato chips.       "We took into account other dietary factors, but it is not possible to entirely rule them		       Dr. Ruth Kava, director of nutrition at the American Council on Science and Health, said that dietary studies such as this have a basic weakness because they depend upon how well people remember what they eat.       "The difficulty with this type of study is that you can't be sure how accurate it is," Kava said. She also noted that seeing a relative risk increase of 46 percent is only "weakly significant biologically."       "More study needs to be done," said Kava.       Hu agreed, saying that the findings need to be confirmed by other research. But he said the work does suggest that there needs to be research to determine if there is a link between diets high in processed meats and the incidence of heart disease and cancer.       An estimated 16 million Americans are thought to have diabetes. About 90 per cent of the cases are type 2, or adult-onset disease. In type 2, there is either a shortage of insulin or the body's cells become insensitive to the hormone. This allows a build up in the blood of sugar, a condition that can damage the kidneys, heart or eyes, and reduce circulation. Untreated, type 2 diabetes can lead to blindness, kidney failure, limb amputation and death.LONDON (Reuters) - Scientists are winning the fight against cancer but it is a long, slow process and the disease that kills about six million people each year may never be eliminated, said Nobel medicine laureate Sir Paul Nurse. Don't expect any magic bullets. Forget miracle cures. Cancer is not one but more than 200 different types of disease and far too complicated for any quick fixes. "Our generation will make significant progress. I really do believe that. I don't believe we will eliminate cancer," the co-director of Cancer Research UK, Europe's largest research organization, told Reuters in an interview. Nurse should know. The 53-year-old motorcycle enthusiast who has the look and boyish charm of American comedian Robin Williams has been delving into the secrets of cells for more than two decades. He shared the 2001 Nobel Prize for identifying essential components that control how cells replicate. Faults in the controls of cell division are what causes cancer. Instead of dying the mutated cell keeps dividing and eventually forms a tumor. "It is an immensely complex disease. Much more complex than most other (diseases) we have to deal with," said Nurse. "Because of the complexity there aren't going to be easy quick hits. There may be some but essentially we have to understand fully one of the most complicated diseases known to mankind," he told Reuters. LONG-TERM STRATEGY Nurse, who celebrated his award with a new Kawasaki GPZ 500 motorcycle, is confident that new findings about the genetic and environmental components that cause cancer will lead to better treatments and improved prevention strategies. But he said the one component that could have the biggest impact on cancer has nothing to do with a miracle drug. "The single most major hit we can get for short-term cancer rates is to eliminate the use of tobacco. We have to try to do that." It is an old message but one which Nurse said people are failing to heed. If smokers quit and adolescents don't start fewer people would die from lung and other cancers linked to tobacco. Lung cancer kills about a million people each year. Avoiding known causes of cancer such as tobacco and over-exposure to the sun, coupled with a better understanding of the genetic components that promote cancer, is the two-prong attack that Nurse said will make a difference. "If you understand the genetic makeup better we will be able to sort out the environment more easily. That is a new type of approach that we will be able to increasingly use over the next 10-20 years and I think that could lead to significant improvements in prevention," according to Nurse. Of the estimated 30,000-40,000 genes in humans, scientists suspect perhaps a few hundred are involved in cancer. Each particular cancer, be it breast, colon or skin, is probably defective in a subset of those genes. "We now understand cancer much better. We have the conceptual tools and we have the scientific tools to dissect it and it is that understanding that will lead to better treatments," said Nurse. Nurse likens some of the cruder cancer treatments to shaking a broken radio. Sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't but it is better than doing nothing. "If we really understand how the radio works we should tailor treatment to make it work better. That's the state we're in (with cancer) and that's why I'm optimistic," he explained. "We will always have cancer with us because of natural mistakes in the natural body so it will never be eliminated but I think we can do much better than we are doing now."