USA'S IMAGE: THE SAVAGES AND THE VOICE OF AMERICA Americans would not settle down. There is another scandal being raised now, so short after the statement from the American president pertaining to the establishment of a special structure in the American administration for the foreign political propaganda. This time George Bush announced that the USA was establishing the new state radio station to broadcast in the Arab countries. Bush said that on Monday after he had visited the Voice of American headquarters. The head of the White House congratulated the employees of the radio with its 60th anniversary and said that the new radio station, the Middle East Network, would become a branch company of the Voice of America. The programs of the new radio will include music, the news, "which will be trustworthy" and the information in the Arabic language. The goal of the broadcasting in the Arab countries is to give those countries an opportunity to realize the American principles and actions better, as Bush said. In other words, it is about the creation of the positive image of America, which has been considerably spoiled by Al-Jazeera television network, so it is supposed to be raised up to the mark, because the Arabs do not want to perceive the USA as the liberator. Why did the American president decide to stake on the radio? The television audience is way bigger, so there are a lot more opportunities there. It is easy to explain this: the countries, which cover the television audience somewhere around the 100% level, are hardly to become of interest to the States. These are the countries of Europe and a certain part of Asia. The television companies of the Middle East are totally controlled by the leaders of the countries, even the death penalty can be applied for the viewing of the satellite channels in some of the countries. So America got nothing to look for in that part of the market. So here you go - radio: not that expensive, more efficient, taking account of the VOA's extensive experience in the field of American propaganda. For the time being this radio station broadcasts in 53 countries of the world, and its audience is more than 90 million people. So America's weapon of the Cold War - the Voice of America is in the big picture again. It will now advocate the American lifestyle, narrating the stories in Thousand and One Night style. OUR READER JAMES YERIAN: THE WORLD ISN'T FOCUSING ON RUSSIA ANYMORE, AND THE ANTI-AMERICANISM THAT IS OUT THERE IS SOMEWHAT UNJUSTIFIEDA note on the American fetish your paper seems to have. I don't know why Pravda focuses so much on the USA, and I do not know why it has to be unfairly criticized so much. I realize that the US is not popular now, especially regarding Afghanistan, but quite frankly, it's because of the USSR that Afghanistan became the mess that it did [and also Vietnam and the Korean war, but I digress], that the conditions were created to harbor terrorism (bin Laden), which of course led to our course of action (self defense) that Russia now loves to condemn. Read the whole version here 17:58GREEN PARTY OF UKRAINE - A PRO-PRESIDENTIAL PARTY? Green Party of Ukaine declares this pre-election campaign to be the most "dirty" in Ukraine, PRAVDA.Ru correspondent Andrei Lubenski reports from the city of Cherkassy Vitaly Kononov, leader of Ukrainian Green Party, has started its pre-election tour with Cherkassy region. He met with students in Umani settlement, visited the oldest Ukrainian oak (which is over 1100 years old) in Kholodny Yar settlement - this powerful tree is still alive thanks to the greens' care, - afterwards arrived in the city of Cherkassy, where he visited the local university and met with his voters in the regional theatre and carried out a press conference. More details... 16:57BAD WILL GAMES OR WHAT ABOUT YOUR HAEMOGLOBIN?Why is it we are so slow getting what we are told? Far from the first time, quite openly, Russia has been told her people belong in a special reservation for economically and mentally underdeveloped nations. Yet we are not getting it, no matter how they try! Possibly, in our childhood, we were taught too long the outdated Soviet notions concerning sports and honest competition being synonyms. Now we are being taught the full Olympic version of the opposite! More details... 15:15GEORGIAN SECURITY COUNCIL'S SECRETARY TOOK AWAY TO GRAVE SHEVARDNADZE'S SECRETSOn Monday, Secretary of Georgian National Security Council Nugzar Sadzhaya committed suicide in State Office of Georgia. This was reported today by Georgian TV channels. Several minutes later after his suicide attempt, Sadzhaya was transported to republican hospital, where he died on operating table. More details... 12:30NEBOJSA MALIC: MASTERS OF MENDACITY It has been a week since Slobodan Milosevic was put on "trial" before the Hague Inquisition. The prosecution's opening statement made clear their goal: to convict Milosevic of causing every misfortune in the Balkans over the past decade, and through him, the entire Serbian people. In the words of Milosevic's bane, Vojislav Kostunica, the Inquisitors wallowed in "shallow misinterpretation of history," and their claim that Serbs were not on trial was "extremely stretched." And this is about as emotional as Kostunica gets. The Inquisition proudly stands by its "history." It is a work of incredibly talented dark arts, to be sure, on par with some of the most twisted deliberate misinterpretations of reality ever concocted. More details... 11:00LEFT AGAINST RIGHT IN PORTUGUESE GENERAL ELECTIONS In the run-up to the legislative elections on 17th March, the Portuguese political parties line up for possible future coalitions. More details... 18:02RUSSIA HONORS DEFENDERS OF THE FATHERLAND Russia celebrates Defenders of the Fatherland Day today. This year, it was announced as a state holiday. People all over the country bring flowers and wreaths to the monuments in honor of the military men who died defending their fatherland More details... RUSSIA DUMPED ITS COMPATRIOTS Russia, which is the successor of the Soviet Union, left its compatriots to the mercy of fate. This is the major conclusion of the law "On the Citizenship in the Russian Federation," to which the Russian parliament gave the second reading. The bill, which was given the first reading at the end of the past year, was submitted to the parliament by President Putin. It is surprising, but the irreconcilable left and right factions united during the process of the discussion on Wednesday - the deputies from Union of Right Forces (known for the Russian initials SPS), Yabloko, the Communist Party, and the Agro-Industrial Group found a common language and voted against the bill during the second reading. The centrist factions - Unity, Fatherland-All Russia, People's Deputy and the Liberal and Democratic Party of Russia (LDPR) voted for the bill, and these votes outbalanced: 235 deputies voted for the bill, whereas 226 votes were enough. The rules for obtaining the Russian citizenship are going to be tougher now. The document, which was submitted by the Russian president, changed only in the negative direction. Deputy Boris Nadezhdin said that the new variant of the bill was fundamentally different from what the president was expecting. So, if the foreign citizens or the citizens without the citizenship have a wish to get the Russian passport, they will have to live on the territory of Russia for five years running. This five year period starts from the moment, when a citizen obtains the residential permission, not from the moment of the physical residence. In other words, millions of the people will not be able to get a Russian passport for five years. This term can be cut by two years, in case of a marriage with a Russian citizen; this privilege will also be granted to those, who have outstanding achievements in science, technology and culture, or a profession, which is of interest to the country. Those, who wish to become Russian citizens, will have to meet certain requirements. First of all, they should know the Russian language and the Constitution. The decision to grant the Russian citizenship will be in the competence of the president. A simplified order to get the citizenship is also possible: in this case the decision will be made by the home ministry, by the Russian embassies and consulate offices abroad. As a matter of fact, all those measures could be welcomed, if there were some benefits for our former USSR compatriots, but the parliament refused from that idea. Russia has actually dumped them. There are so many situations, when the people of the Commonwealth of Independent States refuse to be the citizens of the countries, in which they live. The unrecognized republics of Abkhazia and Transdniestr are very good examples to illustrate. It should be mentioned that those measures were mentioned this way or another in the original bill, which was submitted by the president. The citizens, who were born on the territory of the Russian Federation, who had the Soviet citizenship, had a right to be granted certain benefits. Now they have been deprived of it. The majority of the deputies believed that it contradicted to the constitutional and international legal principles. Deputy Anatoly Chekhoyev was indignant: "We betrayed 28 million Russian people from the republics of the former Soviet Union! We opened the doors for our enemies and closed them for our friends!" Now the bill will be prepared for the third reading. The document is to come into effect on July 1 of the current year. However, Anatoly Lukyanov, the head of the parliamentary committee for state structure, said that the document would have to inevitably go through the process of the second reading again, since "there are a lot of amendments, which contradicted both to the certain paragraphs of the documents, and to each other." It should be also mentioned here that the deputies rejected the amendments, which allowed getting the citizenship of one of the republics at the same time with the Russian citizenship. Greetings from Russia Mr. Sunic! We at PRAVDA.Ru are very pleased that you have agreed to become one of our columnists. As a Croatian diplomat, you are able to share with our readers valuable commentary on today's Croatia. We feel that by conducting this interview, our readers will come away with a better understanding of who you are and your basic political stances. Please tell our readers a little about yourself. What experiences have you had that have shaped your outlook on politics and life in general? When did you first become interested in politics? Also, please tell us something about your diplomatic career. Politics was part of family life. My father, a Catholic attorney and a former political prisoner, was constantly at loggerheads with the Yugoslav communist authorities. Back in communist Yugoslavia, I expressed my resentments against the mendacity of the system by dropping out and becoming a hippy and even hiking down to India. Being reared on books in several languages helped me to complete my university degrees and put myself into a wider perspective. I like to speculate as to how my interlocutor or enemy perceives me. This requires a great deal of intellectual effort and emotional detachment. After the breakup of Yugoslavia, I was called by Tudjman's government to do some diplomatic lobbying for Croatia. What is your position on the Croat-Serb war? At one point, it was reported that Serbia and Croatia had actually reached a compromise that would have stopped the war, but Croatia was pressured by the West to form an alliance with the Bosnian Muslims and to fight against the Serbs. Is there any truth to this? In your opinion, did outside powers benefit from the civil war? I must have heard a myriad of rumors and conspiracy theories regarding the breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991. I do not blame so much the Serbs as I do the decade-long EU and USA upholding of the frail legality of the multiethnic brew called Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia was the product of Versailles architects in 1919 with a refill of the allied blessing in 1945 in Potsdam. Slobodan Milosevic strictly knew that; notably while trying to salvage Yugoslavia by force, which actually sped up its forceful demise. Hence, the real reason he is paying a hefty price now in the Hague. It is known that many Croatian communists became nationalists after Croatia's succession from Yugoslavia. Were these conversions genuine, or were these politicians merely opportunists? The latter is true. However, almost all former Croatian communists are now ultra-liberal free marketers. This is a trademark not just of Croatia but of all post-communist countries, including Russia. What is worrisome, however, is not so much the make-believe volume of civic and democratic parlance of the new political class; rather, it is the shiftiness and phenomenal feel-good lightness by which it betrayed its former Marxist mythology. If some other political myth holds sway tomorrow, the same people will flock to new secular deities with no feelings of guilt. While Serbia has traditionally had close ties with Russia, Croats seem to identify more with Western European nations, such as Germany. In fact, it has been reported that many volunteers from Western nations came to Croatia to participate in the civil war. It was also reported that many Russians and other Slavs participated on the side of Serbia. Do you have any knowledge of this being the case? If so, to what extent did foreign volunteers participate in the civil war? Over 2000 foreign volunteers from Chile to Canada, from the USA to Australia, and served at some point in early Croatian rag-tag units during the so-called Homeland War. This was partly due to cultural affinities and partly to the strong anticommunist feelings of many. The Serb-dominated Yugoslav army displayed the communist red star insignia until 1995, which invariably boosted the early Croatian separatist cause among European and US conservatives. The unfortunate religious cleavage between the Orthodox East and Catholic West violently erupted to the fore. Many Western volunteers and many Croat expatriates came to fight. I cannot be more specific at this stage. What is your opinion of Ante Pavelic, the Croatian leader during WW2? It has been claimed that the Ustashe government committed many atrocities against Serbs, Jews, and other non-Croats. How much of this is propaganda and how much is true? The English historian Edward Carr wrote that, before one studies history, one must study a historian. Failure to look at different, i.e., revisionist historical accounts, leads to misperceptions, paranoia, and, eventually, armed conflicts. The former Yugoslav propaganda had committed a mistake by hyper-inflating Croatian fascist crimes of WWII. Tudjman in 1990, dared to demolish this antifascist victimology. His public speeches, given the widespread foreign media prone "historical linkages," soon earned him a bad reputation among liberal pressure groups, both in the USA and Europe. Moreover, his speeches were a big enough reason to alter the mindset of the local, largely rural, Serbs in Croatia, who were already whipped into a frenzy by Milosevic's communist propaganda. The spiral of fear and misperception, backed by mythical and histrionic narratives on both sides, resulted in war in 1991. As for Ante Pavelic, the leader of WWII Croatia, his role must be put into his epoch, i.e., along with the Romanian, Corneliu Codreanu, the Fleming, Staf De Clercq, the Englishman, Oswald Mosley, the Russian-American, Anastase Vonsiatsky, the Spaniard, Franco, etc., and other real or would-be fascist leaders. During my visit to Croatia, I came away with the impression that many Croats cheered when NATO launched its military campaign against Serbia. In your opinion, do ordinary Croats still hold such hostile feelings towards Serbia? Unfortunately, this is largely true. Many Croats, even in academic circles, use this type of "negative legitimization." Serbs are often used as scapegoats for Croatia's own failures, be it in the field of diplomacy or economy. However, centralistic-minded Serbs have traditionally nourished a cult of a "chosen people" destined to play a leading role in policing the Balkans. Hence, the reason that they alienated other non-Serb peoples. The end result was war. From the Berlin Congress in 1878 until 1991, Serbs were the darlings of the anti-German Western powers. I think that, eventually, these two similar peoples will be on speaking terms. Croats must realize that Serbs will remain their first neighbors. However, from a wider anthropological perspective, it is worth alerting the political class in the EU and USA that multicultural, let alone multiracial states, never last long. Such ideas are uncontrolled and irresponsible Third-world immigration, the American government, and the EU are paving the way for their own balkanization. The case of multiethnic ex-Yugoslavia speaks volumes. The current Croatian government has indicated that it would like to join both the EU and NATO. If Croatia is accepted into either of these organizations, what changes do you think might take place in Croatia? In your view, would these changes be positive or negative? There are no "yes's," "no's," or "ifs." Joining the EU and NATO is the only option for Croatia, short of becoming a pariah state. The only problems are the Croatian methods. The Croatian political class does not know the linkages, the possible setbacks, the terms of juridical engagements, etc. Croatia does not have civil society, as it was destroyed after WWII by the Yugoslav leader Tito and his communist followers, who were very largely made up of the semi-rural, bewildered populace. The Croatian public does not fully know the underpinnings of the EU or NATO. It envisions entry into these two supra-national bodies as entry into a self-serving rich men's country club. What Croatia needs first is total de-communization. Without this, Croatia will constantly be plagued by a traumatic lack of decision-making. At this stage, Croatia, similar to the Russian political class, is engaged in broken English mimicry of all things Western. You are known as a very outspoken anticommunist. Please explain the reasons for your opposition to communism? In addition, you have said that Croatia's current, main threats are the "Western" ideals of capitalism and consumerism. If you consider yourself to be an anticommunist as well as an anticapitalist, what political system would you like to see take shape in Croatia, a sort of third-position? There are different forms of anticommunism. However, being an anticommunist does not presuppose that one must, therefore, embrace its only present counterpart, i.e., global capitalism. Both systems have inherent principles of egalitarianism, economism, and universalism, i.e., the belief in the abstract ideology of "human rights" and the dogma of perpetual economic growth. Due to its violent transparency, poor economic results, and negative social-biological selection, along with the nameless topography of terror, communism lost its intellectual appeal. By contrast, modern capitalism, which operates today under the term of "globalism," is more successful in promoting the same totalitarian goals, albeit with different rhetoric. It is utopia achieved. Many failed communist practices are now fully operational, albeit under different labels in the EU and USA. Former paleo-communist political romanticism, such as multiculturalism, multiracialism, academic self-censorship, intellectual opportunism, which is known as political correctness, and the loss of the sense of the tragic, is in full swing in the West. Moreover, unlike communism, modern liberalism, i.e., global capitalism, does not leave visible traces of blood and cohorts of martyrs in its wake. Its destructive longevity is guaranteed. You have also spoken out against blind nationalism, which, in your opinion, was used to manipulate the peoples of the former Yugoslavia. However, you have also indicated that you consider yourself to be pro-European. What are your reasons for your opposition to nationalism? Do you consider yourself to hold pan-European ideas? In hindsight, inter-European nationalism has done irreparable harm to all peoples of European extraction, starting with civil war in America in 1861 and then during the Great Civil War, WWI and WWII. Petty provincial nationalism at the expense of next door similar looking European neighbors is self- defeating. It serves the purpose of non-Europeans and other alien phenotypes. Even in terms of territorial imperative, petty nationalism is today outdated. The only solution lies in supra-statal pockets of cultural resistance by the Europeans in the USA, Chile, South Africa, Europe, all the way to Russia, i.e., in places where remnants of the European peoples still live. Failure to clearly define the enemy today may lead in the very near future to the definite demise of European heritage. Only in this extraterritorial way one must define oneself today as a European and no longer in a narrow autistic, chauvinistic, nation-state framework. You have spent a portion of your life in the United States. From my personal experience as an American living in Europe, I know that many Europeans have a false sense of reality when it comes to life in the USA. You, as a European who lived many years in the United States, have seen firsthand the difference between what is presented the movies and media that Europeans watch and the reality of the everyday American. Please share for our readers your thoughts on the subject. Also, please tell us something about Croatian-Americans. Are many of these immigrants politically active? The problem with all Eastern Europeans, including Croats, is an identity crisis and a deep inferiority complex. The lack of self- assertiveness, which is due to perpetual historical tremors in this region, often results in surreal and self-complacent political romanticism. Most Croats have inherited strong residues of the homo sovieticus mendacity combined with the Melrose Place soap opera dream world. Croat expatriates did play a significant role in financing Tudjman's campaign. However, they also live in their own dream worlds, romanticizing Croatia in folkoristique lime lights. There is also a fundamental psychological gap between Croats in Croatia and Croat expatriates. It is this vicarious misperception of two virtual worlds, respectively, that leads to the breakdown in communication. As far as the new post-Tudjman, left-leaning government in Croatia is concerned, it has shoved aside the Croatian expatriates. I would like for you to give our readers an assessment of the current Croatian government. Can you make a prediction regarding the next elections? If the presidential election were held today, in your opinion, who would win? The cumulative votes of opposition right-wing parties today could easily dislodge the current left-leaning government in a would-be election. Due to their constant bickering and clannish approach to body politics, this is hardly going to be the case. Although a small nation of 4 million citizens, Croatia has phenomenal regional differences between north and south and the Mediterranean Croats, who often make their electoral choices on the basis of their regional in-group decisions. Almost the same replica exists among expatriate Croats, unlike the Flemish, Irish, or Palestinian nationalists, who all have a solid supra-regional political platform. This endless infighting does not make Croatia a serious partner in the eyes of Western observers. It was only during Tudjman's leadership, a man with deep insight into Croatian diversity, that Croatia managed to become an independent state. The actual coalition government, which is made up of five left-leaning parties, has brought the country to administrative standstill. Croatia functions today by EU How is late Croatian President Franjo Tudjman remembered in Croatia? Many in the West consider him to be a war criminal that should have been tried in the Hague. However, during the war, Tudjman received the West's backing and seemed to know how to "play ball" with the Western powers. Is he remembered as the father of independent Croatia or has his reputation suffered as a result of criticism from the West? Tudjman's Croatia did not receive any backing from the West, not until 1995. The emergence of Croatia was primarily the result of nameless volunteers, committed individuals with strong will to power. Prior to 1995, Croatia was subject to an arms embargo, just like the heavily armed rump Yugoslavia, i.e., Serbia. It had to build its administration and army from scratch. It was a moment that briefly united all Croats of different political persuasions. The EU never liked Tudjman. He was a former communist turned a staunch revisionist and anticommunist, a large enough reason for the Western opinion makers to isolate Croatia. The so-called international community is now firmly behind the more docile left-leaning government in Croatia. Speaking of the Hague, how is the issue of the extradition of Croatian war veterans treated by the Croatian press? How does the common Croat feel about the issue? On one hand, it seems that Croatia and Serbia are in the same boat. Both nations are being asked to send people some feel are war heroes to be judged by a foreign court in a foreign land. Even heroes do not last long. Again, Croat soldiers, due to the pressure of various international bodies, are often portrayed as a bunch of criminals. The Hague judiciary looks for "legal equidistance" between the Yugoslav aggressor and the Croat victims. Average Croats are bedazzled and bewildered. Whose gods should they trust today? Yet, I do not blame the Hague or the international community for their half-baked legal practices. Being a disciple of sociologist Vilfredo Pareto and the jurist Carl Schmitt, I blame the lack of leadership in Croatia, the lack of the new elites, and the lack of a meritocracy able to outsmart the often ignorant New World Order architects. Playing meek and hollering "mea culpa" won't help. Pareto wrote,"Whoever becomes a sheep will find a wolf to eat him." This is the case with the Croatian administration staffed by former communists with no initiative, many of whom have a murky past. In your opinion, should the Croatian government do anything to help the Bosnian Croats? It seems that they are in a rather difficult position, as their most popular politicians and political parties have been banned. It is quite clear that they feel as if they are not properly represented in the Bosnian government and that they would like to form an independent Croat state. Is there any chance that, in the future, the Bosnian Croatians could be annexed by Croatia? Playing dumb in politics is often a virtue, but living under the cover of delusions may be dangerous. Bosnia and Hercegovina form a small and belated replica of the failed multiethnic Yugoslavia. It can be upheld on the map, as it currently is, only by foreign, including US, troops and half-ignorant EU commissars. We must remember how former multiethnic Yugoslavia ended its voyage into the darkness. I have spoken with some foreign leaders and members of the media. They are aware of this make-believe country, but they must rhetorically abide by the new "multicultural role models." Croats and Serbs in Bosnia do not have the problem of deciding who to join in the putative future. By contrast, if Bosnian Muslims do not make their own executive decision about their identity, somebody else soon will in their stead. Mr. Sunic, please tell us about your latest book, Against Democracy and Equality. What are the basic ideas of this book? What was your motivation for writing it? This book is a survey of some prominent figures of the so-called conservative revolution of the first part of the XX century, such as the sociologist Vilfredo Pareto, the political scientist Carl Schmitt, the historian Oswald Spengler, and many others. The book also covers their new intellectual followers in today's European New Right. I am appalled by the dogmatic spirit and bias in the American and EU higher education, which has for decades been subject to leftist brainwashing and to fraudulent Freudo-Marxian scholasticism. I am also shocked by the false meritocracy in the American establishment and by the ridiculous affirmative action system, which definitely reminds me of the quota system in hiring that was in place in the ex-communist multiethnic Yugoslavia. The best and the brightest are, as a rule, shoved aside. The modern liberal theology of the big buck, the dictatorship of well-being, coupled with the false misnomer of "multiculturalism," destroys all values and all cultures, including our own. I do not blame non-Europeans, and I reject conspiracy theories. I primarily hold responsible lazy and corrupted academics, the modern media, and politicians who are mortgaging the Euro-American future. However, most likely, we need more chaos in our polity, because only out of chaos new elites and a new value system can emerge. Dr. Sunic, thank you very much for the interview! It was very informative and we at PRAVDA.Ru look forward to our further cooperation. QUESTIONS COMPILED BY JUSTIN COWGILL The author is a writer and former political science professor in the USA. He is also a Croatian diplomat. Mr. Sunic writes from Europe. His website can be found at http://www.watermark.hu/doctorsunic/GREEN PARTY OF UKRAINE - A PRO-PRESIDENTIAL PARTY? Vitaly Kononov, leader of Ukrainian Green Party, has started its pre-election tour with Cherkassy region. He met with students in Umani settlement, visited the oldest Ukrainian oak (which is over 1100 years old) in Kholodny Yar settlement - this powerful tree is still alive thanks to the greens' care, - afterwards arrived in the city of Cherkassy, where he visited the local university and met with his voters in the regional theatre and carried out a press conference. In particular, the journalists were interested what position his party had on president Leonid Kuchma and why the party is sometimes called "pro-presidential." V.Kononov asked to explain him, what it was in general "pro-presidential" party. According to him, the greens support the activities of the president which correspond with the party's programme aims, and it did not support that ones which do not correspond with the party's aims. "When Kuchma closes Chernobyl nuclear power station, the greens are a "pro-presidential" party, supporting Kuchma's activities; though when the president finishes building of nuclear power stations in the city of Rovno or in Khmelnitsky, we are an "anti-presidential" party," - he said. The leader of the greens also noticed (while answering the question about impeachment) that the question about the president should be solved "without revolutions", at the next presidential election: "if you do not like the today's president, elect another one!" Apropos, the Green Party has already met with counteraction of the administration resource. According to the second person of the Green Party, "we everywhere meet examples of ignoring the election law, the rights of the candidates and the electorate." The most spread method of counteraction to the party's pre-election campaign is spoiling advertising materials of the party, tearing off big boards and leaflets. Such incidents took place in Crimea, Rovno and Odessa. According to O.Shevchuk, the 2002 election campaign is "the most dirty of all carried out in Ukraine within the years of its independence." Though, this does not witness the party is an opposition one: such methods are used in Ukraine against rivals without taking into account their ideology. V.Kononov told about concrete actions of the party (fight against illegal building of refuelling stations in natural zones of Ukraine, annihilation of overdue pesticide storehouses, placing of water-purifying equipment in some settlements etc.). At the same time, he noticed that not everything depended on the greens, and appealed the citizens to more actively defend their ecological and civil rights. According to him, Ukrainians' low activity in defending their interests is still a serious problem: while the citizens themselves do not fight for environment's purity, for their and their children's health, any party cannot do it for them," - he said. As an example Kononov mentioned German citizens' activity, who do not want to resign themselves that overworked nuclear waste products return from France to Germany. The German greens have to carry out explanatory work, while telling that the waste are being legally returned to the country. Though, when through Ukrainian territory nuclear waste from Bulgaria are being transported, the Ukrainian greens have to make efforts to organize the citizens for protest actions, because people seem to be indifferent. According to him, now the transporting route of nuclear waste will be reviewed by the initiative of Bulgaria. Apropos, Moldavian parliament took a decision not to pass the dangerous load through Moldavian territory. Though it is not known, where the new route (through Black Sea) will be more save or not. Finally, the Green Party's leader said, from global view, this waste will be dangerous everywhere, including closed defence complex Krasnoyarsk-26. In general, according to V.Kononov, the only way to solve ecological issues is to make citizens' position more active: they should learn to more actively demand it from the power. Otherwise, all the defects could be written off to the greens. So, while answering a journalist's question, why the greens cannot be seen near to Cherkassy zoo, where animals starve and live in horrible conditions, Kononov said he was against zoos at all. He advised the citizens of Cherkassy to close their zoo, if the city administration does not have money to keep it. Or the citizens should control spending budget money. "At least, you paid taxes, from this money, means must be apportioned for the zoo, - Kononov said. - I cannot understand how in 21st century animals can starve. This is an absolutely non-humane position." The Green Party's leader presented his pre-election programme and outlined top-priority issues, the main of which is the issue of control over ecological laws that have been already passed. "If our ecological legislation is kept, Ukraine will be one of the most ecologically prosperous countries," - he said. 