Israeli ruling noted barely by U.S. Jews Washington PostMarch 03, 2002 In quieter times, a ruling by Israel's Supreme Court on the touchy issue of Jewish identity might have sent shock waves through the American Jewish community.But the court's decision Feb. 20 affirming Reform and Conservative conversions caused relatively little stir in the United States, even among Orthodox Jews."Jews around the world have closed ranks. . . . People are more concerned right now about the physical existence of Israelis than about social issues in Israel," said Nathan Diament, director of public policy for the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America, which represents 1,000 synagogues.Until the ruling, Israeli law recognized as legitimate only those conversions performed by Orthodox rabbis. The ruling by the Supreme Court in Jerusalem required the Interior Ministry to list Israelis who have undergone Reform or Conservative conversions as Jews on their government-issued identity cards and in Israel's population registry.Reform and Conservative groups, which have only a small following in Israel but are the dominant strains of Judaism in the United States, hailed the decision as a partial victory in the long and divisive "Who is a Jew?" debate."At such a difficult time in Israel, this is a paramount statement about worldwide Jewish unity. The Supreme Court has affirmed that all of us, Reform, Conservative, Orthodox and secular, are of the same people, no matter how we got here," said Philip Meltzer, president of Arza/World Union, North America, which represents America's Reform Jewish community in Israel.Suicide bomber kills 9 at bar mitzvah Republic news servicesMarch 03, 2002 JERUSALEM - A suicide bomber waded into a crowd leaving a bar mitzvah celebration in an ultra-Orthodox part of Jerusalem on Saturday night, killing at least nine people and injuring at least 30, Israeli police said.Early today, Israeli helicopters fired four missiles at Palestinian Authority headquarters and a small factory in Bethlehem. The Israeli military said the strike was retaliation for the bombing.In Israel's strike in Bethlehem, helicopters targeted the building serving Force 17, an elite unit of the Palestinian security forces. The missiles set the building on fire, and ambulances raced to the scene, witnesses said. Missiles also struck a blacksmith shop that the military said was a weapons factory. Palestinian security officials said police weapons were repaired there. No casualties were reported in either airstrike.Among the dead in the suicide bombing was an 18-month-old girl hit in the head by shrapnel. The bomber, who some say was dressed as an Orthodox Jew, also died.Most of the victims were from two families who had marked the traditional coming of age for two 13-year-old boys.The explosion touched off an enormous fireball that rose three stories. Two blocks away, Yehuda Brizel, 19, had finished a meal when he heard and felt the blast. He raced out of the house."People were crying," he said. "I saw little kids. There were three or four kids on the street. The fire was on them. I started taking people out, a few that I could, then help came. I felt a piece of hand, a person's foot. I had to go." Television cameras in the Palestinian city of Ramallah captured people dancing in the streets as news of the bombing spread. Israel TV reported that Yasser Arafat's Palestinian Authority condemned the terrorist attack.Al Aqsa Martyrs Brigade, the militia of Arafat's Fatah organization, claimed responsibility for the blast. Fatah sources identified the bomber as Mohammed Ahmed Draghmeh, 19, a resident of a refugee camp near Bethlehem.In Washington, the Bush administration condemned the "terrorist outrage" and renewed calls for Arafat to end the attacks."Such murder of innocent citizens cannot be justified and can only harm the interests and aspirations of the Palestinian people in progress toward a better future," said Richard Boucher, a State Department spokesman.The attack came as Israeli forces were finishing their sweep through two West Bank refugee camps in search of weapons and fighters. Twenty-three Palestinians and two Israelis died during the three days of raids, which drew criticism at home and abroad. Israel said it was striking terrorists in their bases. Israeli officials showed off dozens of weapons recovered from the crowded camps, one of which they said contained a rocket factory."Has the victim not the right to respond to those who are beating him?" Hassan Jousef, a leader of the militant group Hamas, said upon learning of the bombing.As the blast went off, hundreds of Israeli peace activists were marching toward a square near Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's residence.Shmuel Yitzhaki, 22, a student, said he and five friends had called police minutes before the attack after a man wearing a yarmulke and ritual fringes asked them how to find a street in the Beit Yisrael neighborhood. He was smoking a cigarette, which is not allowed on the Sabbath, "so we called police and figured he would take care of it," Yitzhaki said.