The corruption of Tony Blair 

The Prime Minister's pledge to restore faith in public life rings increasingly hollow. And the only person he has to blame for this is himself 

Andrew Rawnsley
Sunday February 17, 2002
The Observer 

Let us - in the phrase of the moment - cut the crap. Is this government corrupt? Can they be bought? To adapt Tony Blair's defence on the first occasion that he was accused of trading favours for money, does his latest imbroglio with a tycoon tell us that the Prime Minister is a pretty bent sort of guy? Has he turned himself into the rentboy of Number 10, cruising Downing Street, available for hire to any kerb-crawling businessman with enough of the folding stuff? Does Jonathan Powell, Chief of Staff, keep a tariff of charges in his bottom drawer? 

You know how it would go. One hundred and twenty five thousand buys a snow job for an Asian millionaire in the form of a helpful letter to a foreign government to win him a steel deal. A few hundred thousand from the Hindujas gets the brothers a quickie British citizenship. For a million, Bernie Ecclestone receives a full-on change of policy which directly favours his business. When you look for the unvarnished truth, is that how this works? 

The Conservatives, vestigially conscious that they have to tread cautiously on the subject of sleaze, have been careful not to put these questions quite that baldly. But this is the suggestion that the Tories are trying to ferment in the public mind. Their hope is that the accumulating heap of allegations about New Labour's relationship with donor tycoons of variable provenance will lead the voters to the conclusion that the Government is a putrefying fish which stinks from the head. 

Relatively speaking, British politics is pretty clean. In the European Sleaze Championship, the Brits do not get near the final. On Friday, Tony Blair was in Rome meeting Silvio Berlusconi. Now, there's a Prime Minister of a country which knows about serious, gargantuan corruption. Signor Berlusconi must smile patronisingly at the pathetic level at which the sport is played in Britain. Mr Blair is beset by something so piffling - to an Italian politician - as an obliging missive to another government on behalf of a donor to party funds. 

In Italy, the Prime Minister has the law changed to frustrate investigations into his own business empire, a conglomeration of conflicts of interest which includes a huge slice of the media. Here, we get into a lather about the Government's attempts - usually unproductive and frequently self-destructive - to manipulate public opinion through the media. Signor Berlusconi has no need of a Jo Moore to bury his bad news. The equivalent of his thrall over Italian television would be Mr Blair owning both the BBC and ITV. 

Over in Germany, they still haven't plumbed the bottom of the sludge of Helmut Kohl's years when millions in party donations were exchanged for government contracts. The present and quite possibly future President of France is up to his eyebrows in high-toxin, foul-reeking merde. The charges embrace not just favours for donations, but personal bribes on top. Even Tony Blair's most severe critics do not allege that he pays for his family holidays with suitcases of used notes of unknown origin. 

Italy, France and Germany would all qualify for the World Cup in corruption. I doubt that the gentleman amateurs of Britain would even get an invite to the games. Enron spent a measly 36 grand trying to buy its way into the British government. That they regard British politicians so cheaply tells us how lowly is our position in the corruption league. On the other side of the Atlantic, millions of dollars were disgorged on not just the President, but more than 200 congressmen and senators, many of whom are now supposed to be doing the investigating of Enron. I am not even going to travel to Russia - and points east. 

Not only is Britain much less corrupted than most of the world, some of the measures put in place by this government since 1997 have erected further safeguards. It is no longer possible, as it was during the Tory years, for huge sums to flow in from abroad and for those vast pay-outs to be cloaked in anonymity. I sympathise with some of Mr Blair's frustration that he is the victim of his own transparencies, that his government is being crucified on a cross of its own construction. We may never know the full scope of the access, influence and favours which were bought by Tory foreign donors, whose numbers included fugitives from the law and arms dealers. A lot of the financing of the Thatcher-Major period by thieves and gun salesmen, and precisely what some of that cash bought, remains enveloped in mystery. 

So everything is just fine, then? No, of course it is not. The greater corruption elsewhere in the world should not serve as a reason to be complacent. It is a caution about where our politics will slither if we leave sleaze unchecked. 

Tony Blair once expressed a rather more elevated ambition than being no worse than the Tories. I like to believe that the Prime Minister meant it when he came to office pledging to 'restore faith in public life'. So did many other people: that was a powerful reason for them to vote for him. His rhetorical effusion that he would be 'purer than purer' stretched our credulity to snapping point, but I hoped it contained a streak of sincere intent. 

Part of the problem, one of the reasons that Mr Blair just does not get it, is that he still believes that he is pure. So convinced is the Prime Minister of his own probity that he simply cannot comprehend why so many others are challenging it. Office has corrupted him. Not in the sense that he is personally venal. What I fear is that power has corrupted him intellectually. 

That is why we increasingly hear him defending that which is plainly indefensible. Where once Mr Blair was going to be 'tough on sleaze and tough on the causes of sleaze', now his government is tough on those who attempt to clean up sleaze. The parliamentary watchdog has been driven out of office and the job made more difficult for her successor. This is not because most MPs are sleazy. From my own observation, it is only a tiny number who disgrace their vocation. The myopia of the majority of parliamentarians blinds them to how damaged they all are, how confidence in politics as a whole is being corroded. As Elizabeth Filkin puts it: 'The very few people who are up to something dodgy have been able to besmirch the perfectly reputable majority.' The bad apples are being allowed to ruin the entire barrel. 

Even when MPs are finally impelled to act against one of their own, they make themselves ridiculous in the eyes of the public. For frustrating proper investigation into his affairs using obstruction and smear, Keith Vaz has been suspended from the Commons for a month. I doubt the public regard being given a month off work on full pay as a sanguinary punishment; indeed, I doubt they regard it as any sort of punishment at all. 

The tone is set from the top. Confronted with allegations that require a serious answer, the Prime Minister blusters that it is all 'garbagegate', a contemptuous construct from the lexicon of Alastair Campbell which tells us just how rattled they are getting inside Downing Street. The accusations that the Prime Minister's favours were bought by an Indian steel tycoon would be nothing like as damaging were this an isolated example. The trouble is that it seems to fit a pattern of behaviour. The Prime Minister has form. Each revelation - and I have little doubt that there will be more of these affairs to come - makes it increasingly impossible for him to convince the jury that it is merely yet another coincidence: that between donation received and favour granted there is absolutely no connection. 

I thought there would never be anything quite so wretched as the Ecclestone affair about which Mr Blair told one of his closest intimates: 'This is the end. They'll get me for this.' The Mittal affair is worse than the Ecclestone affair. At least Bernie Ecclestone was a British citizen. At least the Formula One tycoon came to Number 10 with an argument that banning tobacco sponsorship would deprive thousands of British workers of their jobs in a hi-tech industry. This was a highly tendentious argument, but it was a case with a veneer of plausibility. 

Lakshmi Mittal is not British. Contrary to Downing Street's initial protestations, neither is his company. It is registered in a tax haven in the Dutch Antilles and barely a thousandth of its workforce is employed here. Far from batting for Britain by backing the company's bid for Romania's largest steelmaker, Mr Blair was arguably hurting his own country by aiding a competitor to companies which do employ their workforces, pay their taxes, and earn their profits here. 

Let us grant Mr Blair the benefit of the doubt. Let us believe him when he says that he has not knowingly met Mr Mittal, even when they mingled at a party organised by his fundraiser. Let us believe him when he says that he signed the letter in ignorance that the tycoon had only recently donated a large sum to the Labour Party. Why did no one in Downing Street demand further and better particulars about a tycoon the Prime Minister had never heard of before Mr Blair put something as valuable as his signature to a letter to the Prime Minister of Romania? 

Not, I think, because it was a crude pay-off. The problem is more insidious. New Labour in general and the Prime Minister in particular are hopelessly indiscriminatory. So obsessed is Mr Blair by the idea of championing business, so suborned are all the other values of government to corporate interests, that he and his closest staff fail to ask themselves the most basic questions about what sort of entrepreneur the Prime Minister is championing. 

When cornered by the inevitable scandals this reckless behaviour throws up, the Prime Minister is driven to tawdry pleas in mitigation. He railed to the Commons that he would take no criticism from the Tories, when some of them have gone to jail. Has it really come to this, Tony? What a falling away from the ideals he once expressed that the best argument for his government is that none of its members has yet been to prison. 

AK-47 training held at London mosque 
British Islamic extremists have been involved in weapons training with assault rifles at a mosque in London, intelligence sources have told The Observer. 

The disclosures that hardline Islamists practised with Kalashnikov AK-47s at the Finsbury Park mosque in north London underline the pivotal role that Britain has played in the recruitment of volunteers to fight alongside Osama bin Laden's al-Qaeda group all over the world. 

It will also intensify pressure on the Government to crack down on Islamic militants using the UK as a base. 

MI5 recruited worshippers at Finsbury Park who opposed the hardline stance taken by controversial Muslim cleric Abu Hamza, who often leads prayers there, and asked them to help monitor the activities of extremists. Early last year the agents told their handlers that several groups had been taught to strip and reassemble Kalashnikovs in the mosque's basement. It was not clear if the guns were live or deactivated weapons, which can legally be owned in the UK. 

Hamza, the most influential and radical of the prayer leaders at the mosque, said yesterday that, as far as he knew, no 'harmful' activities had ever taken place there. However, he admitted that he could not monitor all areas of the mosque. 

Hamza, who is wanted for alleged terrorist offences in the Yemen, told The Observer that the mosque may have been the victim of a smear campaign by foreign agents. He named Algeria and Egypt as two countries particularly keen to see the mosque shut down. 'They are sending agents to cause us trouble,' he said. 

Last month The Observer revealed that a video showing the execution of Algerian conscripts by hardline militants had been circulated at the mosque. Hamza denied it had been used for recruiting purposes. 

However, MI5 has been told by their agents that scores of young men were being sent from the mosque for training at camps in Afghanistan. They reported that consignments of supplies including radio and telecommunications equipment were dispatched to Pakistan for eventual distribution in the Afghan training camps allied to or run by al-Qaeda. They also revealed a complex operation run by some men attending the mosque to provide volunteers with false documents. Although the men recruited by MI5 were not directly involved in the logistics of supplying overseas Mujahideen, the operation was openly talked about at the mosque. 

Several men involved with the al-Qaeda group have already been linked to Finsbury Park mosque. Feroz Abbassi, a computer engineer from Croydon held by the US in Cuba, was 'indoctrinated' in the mosque, according to his parents. Jerome Courtailler, arrested in Holland for allegedly plotting to blow up the US embassy in Paris, prayed there as did Djamel Beghal, Zacarias Moussaoui and Richard Reid, all of whom have been linked to al-Qaeda by investigators. 

Three former MI5 agents interviewed by The Observer said that the mosque's reputation drew radical Islamists from all over Europe. One recalled white Swedish converts to Islam who had sought out the mosque because they want to take part in 'the Jihad'. 

'They got false papers from people they met at the mosque and were sent to Afghanistan via Germany,' one former agent recalled. 

Senior officers with two Middle Eastern intelligence agencies based in Peshawar, the Pakistani frontier city that was until recently a major base for militant volunteers fighting alongside the Taliban and their al-Qaeda allies, said that interviews with Mujahideen arrested by Pakistani authorities over the last 18 months had revealed that many had received instruction in basic battlefield first aid from a doctor who ran lessons at the mosque. They said that consignments of medical supplies, including large quantities of antibiotics, had been sent from the UK. 

Hamza yesterday denied the allegations, saying that the mosque lacked funds. 

The British sources said they had told MI5 that volunteers who had fought in Afghanistan for the Taliban or for Islamic militants in Chechnya and Algeria boasted at the mosque of battles they had taken part in. Many younger worshippers were deeply impressed by the 'war stories', the men said. 


