KARACHI (Reuters) - The slaying of kidnapped U.S. journalist Daniel Pearl, whose throat was slit on camera by Islamic radicals in Pakistan, set off a wave of revulsion on Friday against his murderers. 
Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf, who has rallied to the U.S.-led war on terrorism and cracked down on Islamic militants, denounced the murder and ordered an all-out nationwide manhunt for suspects still at large. 
A Pakistani investigator said police across the country were searching for up to four suspects in the kidnap of Pearl, abducted during his investigation of Islamic radical groups. 
Jameel Yousuf, chairman of the Citizens-Police Liaison Committee, an official organization deeply involved in the search for Pearl, told Reuters police had detained over half the gang suspected of being involved in the kidnapping. 
"Only three or four people are left who have been identified. Houses are being raided," Yousuf told Reuters. 
President Bush, speaking during a visit to China, called the killing of the 38-year-old Wall Street Journal reporter a "criminal, barbaric" act and vowed no quarter to rid the world of what he described as agents of terror. 
Pearl's family said it was a "senseless murder" that had silenced "a gentle soul." 
A top Pakistan government official told Reuters authorities learned of the killing of Pearl, abducted in Karachi Jan. 23, from a videotape of the murder sent to a Pakistani reporter in Karachi Wednesday or Thursday. 
"I AM A JEW" 
Pearl's death was formally announced late Thursday night. 
His body has not been found and it is unclear exactly when and where he was executed. 
But in a account of Pearl's last moments, the Pakistani official, who asked not to be identified, said Pearl's last words uttered on camera before his killing were that he was a Jew and his father was a Jew. 
"I have been told that the last words uttered by Pearl in the videotape, immediately before his throat was slit, were 'Yes I am a Jew and my father is a Jew'," the official said. 
"Maybe he was forced by his kidnappers to say these words." 
Fahad Naseem, one of three men accused of involvement in the kidnapping, said Thursday Pearl was abducted because he was a Jew working against Islam, according to his lawyer. 
Pakistan police in early February arrested Naseem and two other suspects for sending emails to media organizations that showed Pearl in captivity. 
Dr. Riffat Hussein, a defense and strategic studies analyst at Islamabad's Quaid-e-Azam University in Islamabad, said the sophistication of the kidnapping pointed to possible involvement of Osama bin Laden's al Qaeda network, chief suspect for the Sept. 11 attacks on the United States. 
"If you look at the character of this case -- the methodology that was used, the use of email, and videotape -- it suggests it may have some very significant al Qaeda links," Hussein said. 
A Pakistani source close to the investigation told Reuters the video was short and showed Pearl's throat being cut. 
"The scene that apparently confirmed the murder of Pearl was when one person's hand cut the U.S. reporter's neck with a sharp tool," the source, quoting someone who had seen the tape, said. 
The source added that the tape showed the hands of two or three other people. 
Pearl disappeared in Karachi, Pakistan's largest city of 14 million people, as he tried to contact Islamic radical groups and investigate possible links between alleged shoe bomber Richard Reid and al Qaeda. 
MURDER ON TAPE 
The group claiming to hold Pearl, calling itself The National Movement for the Restoration of Pakistani Sovereignty, accused him of being a spy -- first for the CIA, then for Israeli intelligence. It said it was protesting against U.S. treatment of Taliban and al Qaeda prisoners from the Afghan war. 
Lonnie Kelley, Public Affairs officer at the U.S. consulate in Karachi, told Reuters "both Pakistan and U.S. investigators have identified the perpetrators behind the crime." Police are already holding some suspects. 
They include key suspect Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh, a British-born Islamic militant commonly known as Sheikh Omar who has previous links to kidnappings. 
Omar confessed to the kidnapping before a court in Karachi last week, and said he believed Pearl was dead. 
"Pearl's murder is outrageous and the United States is determined to bring the perpetrators to justice," Kelley said. 
Wall Street Journal Publisher Peter Kann and Managing Editor Paul Steiger said in a statement on Thursday: "We are heartbroken. His murder is an act of barbarism that makes a mockery of everything Danny's kidnappers claimed to believe in. 
"Their actions must surely bring shame to all true Pakistani patriots," they said. 
PREGNANT WIFE 
Pearl's family called him "a beloved son, a brother, an uncle, a husband and a father to a child who will never know him." Pearl's wife Mariane, who was in Karachi, is more than six months pregnant with their first child, a son. 
Bush said Pearl's death would only hurt the cause of his captors. "All Americans are sad and angry to learn of the murder," Bush told reporters before leaving Beijing, his last stop on a six-day trip to Asia. 
"Those who would threaten Americans, those who would engage in criminal, barbaric acts, need to know that these crimes only hurt their cause and only deepen the resolve of the United States of America to rid the world of these agents of terror." 
Secretary of State Colin Powell, who was accompanying Bush on his Asian visit, said Bush spoke by telephone with President Musharraf about the killing. 
"President Musharraf took it pretty badly because he was doing everything to stop the kidnappers" from killing Pearl, Powell told reporters aboard Air Force One. 
Musharraf has vowed every member of the kidnap gang would be hunted down. 
Pearl, the Journal's South Asian bureau chief based in Bombay, India, for the past two years, had been working in Karachi for three weeks when he was kidnapped. 
Friends said he was smart, sweet, soft-spoken, self-effacing and unlikely to take unreasonable risks. He also was a talented fiddler, guitarist and classical violinist. One of three children, Pearl's father is an academic and his mother a computer consultant. 
Outside the temporary newsroom in New York of The Wall Street Journal, which was displaced after the Sept. 11 airliner attacks, a Journal reporter called Pearl's death "a despicable act." 
"HE WOULDN'T HURT A FLY" 
"He wouldn't hurt a fly. It's just disgusting," the reporter said. 
U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan saluted the courage of Pearl and other journalists around the world. "The crime highlights the enormous dangers encountered by journalists, particularly in areas of conflict and violence," Annan said through his spokesman, Fred Eckhard. 
In New York, the Committee to Protect Journalists called Pearl's death "brutal, wanton, and senseless." 

