          FAA rejects jet noise plan .

Federal aviation authorities scrapped an aircraft landing procedure Wednesday at Sky Harbor International Airport that was intended to cut noise over Tempe but actually was noisier, as well as unsafe.The Federal Aviation Administration moved quickly after Phoenix air traffic controllers and pilots expressed safety concerns this week about the "side-step" procedure. The maneuver, in use since October, was part of a 1994 agreement between Phoenix and Tempe to reduce airport noise in Tempe neighborhoods.In contrast to previous disputes, Phoenix Mayor Skip Rimsza and Tempe Mayor Neil Giuliano called a joint press conference at which they each pledged to work with the FAA to find a safe solution.Controllers blamed the procedure for an incident Friday in which two aircraft flew dangerously close to each other.Southwest Airlines pilots also complained about the procedure, said Gus Nezer, FAA air traffic manager in Phoenix.Recent FAA tests revealed that the procedure did not meet the agency's safety standards, he said.Pilots lining up to land from the east on the middle runway were being asked to divert to the South Runway when they were less than three miles from the airport. In some cases, pilots had to prepare to land on all three of Sky Harbor's runways, Nezer said.Nezer also said pilots were forced to throttle up to reach the shorter South Runway, increasing noise over Tempe neighborhoods.Jim Lemmon, past president of the North Tempe Neighborhood Association, which represents about 9,000 residents, continues to hear noise complaints, and he questions whether the side-step maneuver actually reduced noise.

President Bush has no apologies about raising millions of dollars for Republican Senate candidates immediately after signing into law new curbs on the financing of campaigns for federal office. 

After a major money-raising effort for Republican Senate candidates in South Carolina and Georgia, Bush was moving on to Dallas on Thursday to help boost the cash reserves of Texas Attorney General John Cornyn. 


Cornyn is seeking the seat being vacated by Republican Sen. Phil Gramm. 

"I'm not going to lay down my arms," Bush told reporters as he began the two-day circuit on Wednesday in Greenville, S.C. "I'm going to participate in the rules of the system." 

The stakes are high for the GOP. Democrats control the Senate by a single seat. 

"The Senate races are very important to me," Bush said. "I want the Republicans to take control of the Senate." 

Bush signed the campaign finance bill without ceremony in the Oval Wednesday morning. He barely had time to put the cap on his pen before he was off to raise cash for the three GOP candidates. 

The president's appearance helped raise about $1 million in Greenville on Wednesday for the campaign of Rep. Lindsay Graham who seeks the Senate seat being vacated by Sen. Strom Thurmond, the chamber's oldest and longest serving member. 

Moving on to Atlanta, the president raised $1.4 million for the campaign coffers of Rep. Saxby Chamblis, R-Ga., who is campaigning for the GOP nomination to face Democratic Sen. Max Cleland. 

The president plans to end the trip with a long Easter weekend at his ranch near Crawford. 

Bush had displayed little enthusiasm for the campaign finance proposal on the campaign trail two years ago and as it moved through Congress after he entered the White House. But he said Wednesday he "wouldn't have signed it if I was really unhappy with it." 

Bush said that overall he believes it improves the system even though parts of it may be constitutionally flawed. 

In all three cities Bush stopped to encourage police, fire and health emergency workers, to report on progress in the war on terrorism and to denounce rising violence in the Middle East. 

Bush was meeting Thursday in Dallas with rescue workers who traveled to New York to help in the World Trade Center response immediately after the terrorist attacks. 

The event was allotted just 15 minutes on the president's schedule. However, as an official government event it allowed the White House to split the cost of Bush's travel between the GOP and taxpayers. 

Democrats renewed their criticism of the arrangement, which was used heavily by President Bill Clinton. 

"The practice of adding political events to official travel for the purpose of saving candidates money seems to be of questionable merit," said Democratic National Committee spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri.

Nevada bets
millions to stop nuclear dump .

Sensing that time is running out, Nevada's U.S. senators are about to unveil a multimillion dollar media blitz aimed at getting a dozen or so Republicans to vote against putting the nation's nuclear waste dump in Nevada. The strategy is simple: show those Republicans' constituents that tons of nuclear waste would be shipped right past their doors as it heads to Nevada.


