Famine stalks Southern Africa
 
Zimbabwe supermarkets have run out of maize

Nearly four million people in Southern Africa are in desperate need of food aid, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation has warned. 

The FAO said that harvests fell by up to 25% last year and said the situation was particularly acute in Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe. 

What we are experiencing is real human disaster 

Malawi's Catholic priests Stocks of the staple food crop, maize, are reported to be low and market prices are rising beyond the reach of large sections of the population. 

This comes as Malawi's Catholic priests urge the government to declare a national emergency because of the lack of food. 

The FAO blamed the weather and reduced planting for most of the shortfall. It said Zimbabwe had harvested less than half its usual amount because of disruption caused by land seizures. 

Dire outlook 

Emergency food aid would be needed from the middle of April until the next crop was harvested, said the UN agency. 

"WFP (World Food Programme) has started distributions of food aid but more pledges are required to avoid interruptions in the emergency operations," it said. 

 
Hunger threatens the lives of thousands of children


A statement from Malawi's Catholic priests shared the dire outlook of the FAO. 

"What we are experiencing is real human disaster, a famine - it is killing many people especially in the rural areas," they said. 

One priest reported that his parish officiated at least seven funeral rites in one day for people who had died of hunger. 

The priests also appealed to the government to subsidise the price of imported maize but the authorities say this would be too expensive. 

Shops in many parts of Zimbabwe have reportedly run out of maize. 

Zimbabwe observers 'concerned' 
 
Motsuenyane will urge Zimbabwe to lift the ban 
A day after European Union observers pulled out of Zimbabwe, the South African election observer mission has expressed concern over violence in the capital, Harare. 

The mission is also alarmed by a recent decision to prevent some South African media organisations from covering the upcoming elections. 

The head of the South African election observer delegation, Sam Motsuenyane, says he plans to raise the press ban with the Zimbabwean Government. 
We are optimistic that the problem of accreditation will be resolved amicably and speedily 

Sam Motsuenyane
South African observer mission 

''Our experience in South Africa tells us that it is vital for the success of building democracy, to inform the public and the world at large without hindrance,'' Mr Motsuenyane said. 

The Zimbabwean Government has refused accreditation to several foreign news organizations whose coverage has been unfavourable, including many from South Africa. 

The government accuses the banned journalists of fabrication, exaggeration and bias. 

"We will be taking up matters with the authorities on an on-going basis," Mr Motsuenyane said. "Critical at this stage is the accreditation of South Africa media in particular. We believe that the media should be given access to the electoral process in a free way. 

''We are optimistic that the problem of accreditation will be resolved amicably and speedily with the Zimbabwean authorities." 

Violence 

Mr Motsuenyane described as "a matter of great concern" allegations that police stood idly by while opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) offices came under attack. 

"We also received reports about the existence of 'No-Go Areas' for some parties and we are also taking up the matter," he said. "We have already deployed our observers to some of these areas." 

He said the proposed 50-strong team would increase its presence to ensure that the election took place in an environment free of intimidation and violence. 
 
Police were said to have stood by while opposition offices were attacked


Mr Motsuenyane described the mission in Zimbabwe as a daunting task that requires as many monitors as possible. 

The withdrawal of EU observers was unfortunate and regrettable, he said but added that his group would not be deterred by the pull-out. 

''Zimbabwe will need a stable political and economic environment after the elections irrespective of who wins,'' Mr Motsuenyane said. 

Opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai has said he believes it will be almost impossible to hold credible elections, in light of recent violence. 

The MDC's Harare offices were attacked by a group of ruling party supporters who had been demonstrating against the British Government. 

The protesters had accused Britain of meddling in the internal affairs of Zimbabwe and warned British Prime Minister Tony Blair to ''stay off''. 

