By Daren Butler LONDON, Feb 25 (Reuters) - Stronger banks and oils lifted Britain's FTSE 100 index to its highest close in a week on Monday as investors took their lead from gains on Wall Street and anticipated strong U.S. economic data this week. Granada GAA.L stood out in a stronger media sector, gaining 6.1 percent after Goldman Sachs upgraded it to "market outperformer" while Lehman Brothers added Granada to its European recommended portfolio. The blue-chip index closed up 49.9 points or one percent at 5,100.7, rebounding after a 2.5 percent fall last week. "I think the market should be regaining its composure, all the data is telling us that the world economy is recovering, the UK is doing OK and earnings are improving," said Deutsche Bank equity strategist Bob Semple, although he said a lot of the positive economic data so far was based on surveys. "What you need is hard evidence of things getting better. With any luck we will start to see hard numbers like industrial production starting to pick up," he said. Media stocks were boosted by a Deutsche Bank upgrade to "overweight" from "neutral", with WPP WPP.L up 5.9 percent and BSkyB BSY.L up 5.6 percent. Pearson PSON.L rose 4.7 percent after saying it had received expressions of interest from potential buyers of FT Business, its specialist UK financial publisher. Banks delivered 18 points of the index gains amid hopes for further consolidation in the sector after media speculation that banking group Bradford & Bingley BB.L might attract a bid. Bradford & Bingley rose 1.8 percent to 319 pence, while Barclays BARC.L added 3.1 percent after a media report that it was shedding around 1,800 jobs. Royal Bank of Scotland RBOS.L climbed 3.4 percent to 1,743p ahead of its full-year results on Thursday. Among oil stocks, BP BP.L rose two percent and Shell SHEL.L added one percent. FTSE 100 gainers outnumbered losers by nearly four to one and market volume amounted to 2.1 billion shares. By the 1630 GMT close, the Dow Jones industrial average was 100 points higher while the Nasdaq Composite was up 24 points. SWITCHING FROM VODAFONE TO BT Mobile phone firm Vodafone VOD.L fell 2.1 percent, with dealers reporting switching into BT Group BT.L, which is seen benefiting from woes at alternative carrier Energis EGS.L. "There's a big switch going on between Vodafone and BT at the moment...(on) the fact that BT will be the big beneficiary of all the problems at Energis and all those companies, they'll pick up business. BT is seen as the defensive play in the telecoms," said Lawrence Peterman, investment director at stockbrokers Eden Group. Vodafone also took a hit from a Financial Times report that two U.S. telecom firms might have to write off $60 billion in goodwill to reflect accounting changes. Cable & Wireless CW.L jumped 4.8 percent in a bounce from a steep fall last week. A report in the Independent on Sunday said institutional investors were demanding that it return 500 million pounds to shareholders in a special dividend. BT rose 3.5 percent to 264 pence ahead of an announcement on Tuesday about the new wholesale prices for high-speed Internet access. Energis rose 30 percent, recovering some of last week's sharp losses after saying it received takeover approaches for some of its operations. Thus THUS.L rose 17.5 percent, COLT CTM.L was up 15.5 percent and Marconi MONI.L added 14.9 percent after confirming it was in early talks on the possible sale of its Italy-based Strategic Communications unit. INNOGY FALLS AS BID SPECULATION FADES Power firm Innogy IOG.L drifted three percent lower as bid speculation died down. "People now want to see something more concrete to justify this higher price," one dealer said. Invensys ISYS.L rebounded 9.7 percent in a bounce from losses last week when its restructuring plans failed to impress as investors took a fresh look at the stock. A major focus of interest will be Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, who testifies before Congress on Wednesday. This week's data includes the German Ifo business sentiment survey on Tuesday and U.S. data including durable goods, consumer confidence, GDP and supply management data. "You're probably going to start to see some signals that the economy has bottomed out there. If you can see that, then clearly there's some scope for some upside," Eden's Peterman said. The FTSE 250 mid-cap index rose 0.85 percent. Small cap Getmapping GMP.L, which has mapped England and Wales with aerial photographs, slid 19.4 percent after the company said it was starting legal proceedings against Ordnance Survey (OS). (additional reporting by Keiron Henderson) (c) Copyright Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Any copying, re-publication or re-distribution of Reuters content or of any content used on this site, including by framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without prior written consent of Reuters. Quotes and other data are provided for your personal information only, and are not intended for trading purposes. Reuters, the members of its Group and its data providers shall not be liable for any errors or delays in the quotes or other data, or for any actions taken in reliance thereon. (c) Reuters 2001. All rights reserved. Republication or redistribution of Reuters content, including by caching, framing or similar means, is expressly prohibited without the prior written consent of Reuters. Reuters and the Reuters sphere logo are registered trademarks and trademarks of the Reuters group of companies around the world. 