Fox trying to mend rift with Cuba over embassy flap By Tessie BordenRepublic Mexico City BureauMarch 03, 2002 MEXICO CITY - President Vicente Fox scrambled last week to repair already-delicate relations with Cuba after his foreign relations secretary, with a comment to reporters in Florida, sparked an invasion of the Mexican Embassy by visa-starved Cubans on the island.Jorge Casta–eda was in Miami on Tuesday to inaugurate the Mexico Cultural Institute and a new consular headquarters office. When reporters asked him if the doors of the Mexican Embassy in Havana still were open to Cuban dissidents, Casta–eda replied that "they would be open as they would be for any Cuban or Latin American citizen who has an interest in visiting Mexico and having contact with Mexico's representatives in Cuba."Retransmitted by the anti-Castro echo chamber of Miami, and then through Radio Mart’ to people in Cuba, the comments encouraged desperate Cubans to make a mad rush Wednesday to the Mexican Embassy. Twenty-one of them stole a bus and crashed it through the doors before holing up inside the embassy for almost three days.Cuban President Fidel Castro showed up in a jeep outside the embassy to talk with the crowds outside. Later, Fox and Castro talked by phone to try to negotiate a way out of the incident. Security was strong outside the embassy Wednesday and Thursday, and work came to a virtual halt. Early Friday, Mexico asked Cuban government officials to go in, unarmed, to remove the dissidents. Their whereabouts remained unknown Saturday. The newspaper Reforma reported that 150 others also were arrested.The damage to Cuban-Mexican relations and to Fox's ability to govern his own country is vast, said Miguel Garcia Reyes, professor of political and social sciences at Mexico's National Autonomous University."Fox is indeed on a tightrope," Garcia Reyes said. "He has to act very quickly for things not to get out of his hands. Casta–eda has always been a problem for Fox. A (Cabinet member) can't be more of a protagonist than the president."The question and answer that touched off the furor were a reference to a Cuba visit by Fox three weeks earlier. At that time, Fox met with dissidents despite pledges to the Mexican Congress and to the media that he would not do so. Some Congress members condemned the meeting as a show of disrespect to Castro and a deliberate attempt to mislead them. The Congress must approve beforehand any foreign state visits by the president.During the Cuba visit, Castro met with Fox several times and joined him at an event to award a medal to Cuban historian Eusebio Leal Spengler. The two discussed mainly economic possibilities and investment opportunities, touching on political themes when they discussed other Latin American countries."They are warming up well and deepening," Fox said of Cuban-Mexican relations at the time. "We have 100 years (of relations) behind us, so that speaks to the potential we have before us."However, given Fox's close bond with President Bush and the general strengthening of the U.S.-Mexican relationship in the past several years, and given the U.S. belligerence toward Castro, the Cuba question remains a delicate one for Fox. For the second time in as many years, Fox announced on his return that Mexico would abstain from a U.N. vote on Cuba's human rights record in April.Casta–eda's comments last week were like setting fire to gasoline-drenched wood, Garcia Reyes said. The secret meeting with dissidents fueled their hopes for a further opening from Mexico, and misinterpretation was likely. Garcia Reyes blasted Casta–eda for his apparent carelessness.For his part, Casta–eda blamed what he called "radical elements in Miami" for the misunderstanding."(They) saw with evil eyes President Fox's visit to Cuba, his meeting with Commandant Castro, the improving relations, what I called normalization," Casta–eda told the Mexican radio station Radio Red. In Phoenix, local Cubans watched the crisis and its final result with dismay."I think it's more of a morality issue," said Adonis Benis, a social worker who left Cuba with his parents at age 12. "People have gone into your embassy, and you know if they're returned to the government they will be tortured. How can they turn around and return someone to that? When the U.S. returns undocumented workers across the border . . . the Mexican government doesn't agree with that. Why would they return people that they know will be tortured and possibly killed by a regime like Castro's?"