The Army could have a new "offensive" weapon in their arsenal before long. One that really stinks!
Department of Defense officials have asked researchers at the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia to create a universally offensive odor that can be used by the military for, among other things, crowd control, according to an article in the January 7 issue of Chemical & Engineering News, the weekly newsmagazine of the American Chemical Society, the world's largest scientific society. 
The non-lethal "odor bomb" is said to smell like rotting garbage, human waste and burning hair, according to the article's author, senior editor Maureen Rouhi, Ph.D. Tests show the putrid odors "are potent in making people want to flee in disgust," notes the article. The odors also cause shallow breathing, increased heart rate and can lead to nausea, it adds. 
The researchers focused on biological odors "because we thought those had the best chance of being recognized universally," says Monell researcher Pamela Dalton, Ph.D. "People really hated these odors," she adds. 
Monell is the world's first research institute devoted to the multidisciplinary study of the chemical senses. 
Another area of smelly research at Monell involves body odor. 
Researchers call herbs rich source of healthy antioxidants; oregano ranks highest 
Better health may be only a dash and sprinkle away: Researchers with the U.S. Department of Agriculture have found that herbs, in addition to making food tastier, are an abundant source of antioxidants and could provide potential anticancer benefits when supplementing a balanced diet. 

Herbs have higher antioxidant activity than fruits, vegetables and some spices, including garlic, the researchers say. Their findings appear in a recent (Nov.) print issue of the Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, a peer-reviewed journal of the American Chemical Society, the world's largest scientific society. 

"Some herbs should be considered as regular vegetables," says Shiow Y. Wang, Ph.D., the study's lead researcher and a biochemist with the USDA's Beltsville Agricultural Research Center in Beltsville, Md. "People should use more herbs for flavoring instead of salt and artificial chemicals." 

Using various chemical tests, Wang studied and compared the antioxidant activity of 39 commonly used herbs grown in the same location and conditions. The study, which did not involve animal or human subjects, included 27 culinary and 12 medicinal herbs. 

In what may be good news for pizza lovers and Italian food connoisseurs everywhere, the herbs with the highest antioxidant activity belonged to the oregano family. In general, oregano had 3 to 20 times higher antioxidant activity than the other herbs studied, says Wang. 

On a per gram fresh weight basis, oregano and other herbs ranked even higher in antioxidant activity than fruits and vegetables, which are known to be high in antioxidants. In comparison to the antioxidant activities of a few select fruits and vegetables, the potency of oregano ranks supreme: Oregano has 42 times more antioxidant activity than apples, 30 times more than potatoes, 12 times more than oranges and 4 times more than blueberries, Wang says. 

For example, one tablespoon of fresh oregano contains the same antioxidant activity as one medium-sized apple, she says. (For other herbs, please see last page of release.) 

Adding a moderate amount of herbs may go a long way toward boosting the health value of a meal, especially as an alternative to salt and artificial additives, the researcher suggests. 

Even if you're not into oregano, other herbs also appear to pack a significant antioxidant punch. Among the more familiar, ranked in order, are dill, garden thyme, rosemary and peppermint. 

The most active phenol component in some of the herbs with the highest antioxidant activity, particularly oregano, was rosmarinic acid, a strong antioxidant, the researcher says. 

Antioxidants have become synonymous with good health. They are a class of compounds thought to prevent certain types of chemical damage caused by an excess of free radicals, charged molecules that are generated by a variety of sources including pesticides, smoking and exhaust fumes. Destroying free radicals may help fight cancer, heart disease and stroke, researchers believe. 

Fruits and vegetables have long been viewed as a rich source of antioxidant compounds. Health officials have been urging consumers for years to eat more fruits and vegetables in order to gain the health benefits of antioxidants, but progress has been slow, according to researchers. Westerners still tend to favor diets that are rich in fats and carbohydrates, they say. 

More recently, researchers have begun to formally study the health benefits of herbs and spices. The two differ mainly by source. Herbs typically come from the leaves of plants. Spices come from the bark, stem and seeds of plants. Both have been used for thousands of years to flavor foods and treat illness. 

Now, herbs have emerged as a quick and easy way to get a concentrated source of antioxidants - without all the extra calories of whole foods, Wang says. She recently compared the antioxidant activity of herbs to a few select spices, including paprika, garlic, curry, chili, and black pepper. Herbs came out on top, she says. 

Herbs can be consumed in a variety of ways. Some people prefer to drink herb extracts, which can be made by adding herbs to hot water to make potent antioxidant teas. Others use concentrated herbal oils available in some health food stories. Most of us prefer a little dash and sprinkle of the familiar leafy or powdered versions to add flavor to our favorite meats and vegetables. 

In general, fresh herbs and spices are healthier and contain higher antioxidant levels compared to their processed counterparts. For example, the antioxidant activity of fresh garlic is 1.5 times higher than dry garlic powder, the researcher says. 

Just as consuming too much of any food product can carry health risks, herbs should be used with moderation, she cautions. 

Whatever form they take, herbs are no substitute for a balanced diet, Wang says. Pregnant women in particular should consult their physicians before taking herbal supplements, she adds. 
Monell chemist George Preti, Ph.D., has spent 30 years investigating such unpleasant human smells as underarm odor, bad breath and "fish odor syndrome," a genetic disease called trimethylaminuria. Fish odor syndrome can be devastating to people with extreme cases, notes the article. They can smell like fish regardless of how many times they bathe or change clothes. 
Unfortunately, because trimethylaminuria can occur sporadically, doctors are not always able to diagnose the disease. However, Preti has a battery of tests he administers that can tell if a person has trimethylaminuria. Based on the results of the tests, Preti provides an extensive report that patients can then give to their doctors who can provide prescriptions for antibiotics to alleviate or reduce the smells. 
Charles Wysocki, Ph.D., another Monell researcher, is working with Preti and the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture to lessen offensive farm odors. With more urban housing communities springing up near what were once isolated rural farm regions, complaints have increased from the new neighbors about the pungent smells of nearby mushroom and pig farms. The research is especially meaningful to the state given the importance of farms to Pennsylvania's economy. 
News from ACS  	 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 9 January 2002 
Contact: Beverly Hassell 
b_hassell@acs.org 
202-872-4065 
American Chemical Society 	  
 Adding vitamin C to certain drugs may help treat Alzheimer's, other brain disorders 
Drugs used to treat Alzheimer's and other brain disorders appear to enter the brain more easily when a vitamin C molecule is attached, according to researchers in Italy. The discovery could lead to safer and more effective drugs that target the brain, they say. 

The study is tentatively scheduled to appear in the Jan. 31 print issue of the Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, a peer-reviewed publication of the American Chemical Society, the world's largest scientific society. It was published in the Web edition of the journal on Dec. 21. 

"We've opened a door for a promising new way to improve delivery of drugs into the brain using a natural nutrient, ascorbic acid [vitamin C]," says Stefano Manfredini, lead investigator in the study and a professor of pharmaceutical chemistry at the University of Ferrara in Ferrara, Italy. 

Some drugs that have difficulty entering the brain could cross more easily when attached to a vitamin C molecule, while some that cannot enter the brain could enter for the first time, he says. Potential applications include drugs for central nervous system diseases, viral infections (including AIDS), brain lesions, and neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and epilepsy, Manfredini says. 

He calls the results "exciting," but cautions that the data are very preliminary. So far, animal tests of at least one of the vitamin C modified drugs appear promising, but no human tests have been conducted. The new design approach will not enhance the effectiveness of all drugs, while those that do work could take several years to reach the consumer market, the researcher predicts. 

One of the major problems in the treatment of brain diseases is the difficulty of distributing drugs to the central nervous system. This is due to a natural barrier, the blood brain barrier, which selectively regulates the movement of chemicals across the brain. 

Researchers have known for some time that adding new components to drugs may improve their ability to cross this barrier. For example, glucose and amino acid units have allowed improved penetration into the blood brain barrier for some drugs, according to researchers. 

Researchers recently discovered the existence in some cells of a new receptor, the SVCT2 transporter, which is believed to play a major role in regulating the transport of vitamin C into the brain, where vitamin C is found at high concentrations. Manfredini and his associates theorized that adding a vitamin C component to certain therapeutic drugs would facilitate their transport across these receptors and their entry into the brain. 

To test their theory, the researchers studied three different compounds that are used to treat brain disorders - ranging from epilepsy to Alzheimer's - but are known to have difficulty crossing the blood brain barrier. Those compounds are nipecotic acid, kynurenic acid and diclofenamic acid. Researchers tested the compounds in the laboratory using human retinal pigment epithelial cells, which are rich in vitamin C transporters. This laboratory model has the same SVCT2 transporter as the blood brain barrier, allowing researchers to predict drug transport across the blood brain barrier in humans, they say. 

Adding a vitamin C component to each of these three compounds significantly improved their ability to interact with the vitamin C transporter. While nipecotic and kynurenic acids normally cannot interact with the transporter, the same drugs with a vitamin C component added can interact. Although diclophenamic acid normally blocks the vitamin C transport, the same drug with a vitamin C component interacts with the transporter without blocking vitamin C. The results suggest that this approach may improve drug delivery in actual living organisms, the researchers say. 

To test the effect of a modified drug in an animal model, the researchers chose nipecotic acid, which cannot easily enter the blood brain barrier in its normal form. Using a group of mice that had been chemically induced to have convulsions, the researchers injected the normal molecule into the mice. This had no effect on their convulsions. When a vitamin C modified version of the drug was injected, convulsions were delayed, demonstrating the improved performance of the drug, the researchers say. 

Side effects in the mice were very limited and no deaths were reported, they say. 

Additional animal studies of vitamin C modified drugs are anticipated, Manfredini and his associates say. They have filed a patent for their discovery. 

The researchers also believe that the in vitro cell model of vitamin C transporters used in this study will serve as a valuable tool to study one of the many mechanisms by which ascorbic acid works in the body, a mystery scientists have yet to fully understand. An understanding of these mechanisms could provide insights into many of the controversial health claims regarding vitamin C, they say. 

The university and the National Institutes of Health provided funding for this study. 

