Masterpiece: "2001: A Space Odyssey"With music and mind-blowing visuals, Stanley Kubrick created a wildly popular avant-garde film that asked all of the biggest questions -- without venturing any easy answers.March 4, 2002 | "In the first year of the 21st century, there is strange and wondrous beauty, startling experiences that jolt and mystify, and the danger of complete obliteration." -- Original "2001" trailer The painter Georges Braque once wrote that art is meant to disturb, while science reassures. When Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey" arrived in April 1968, both fear and hope were in ample supply. A few days before the film's premiere, Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated, and President Lyndon Johnson, burdened by the ongoing quagmire of Vietnam, had just announced he would not seek reelection. Robert Kennedy's assassination was just two months away, with the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia to follow. Youth across the world were burning bras and buildings.  At the same time, President Kennedy's dream of American astronauts reaching the moon was within our grasp. As Kubrick and co-screenwriter Arthur C. Clarke understood, excitement over the pending 1969 moon landing, and over space exploration in general, gave us license to consider a greater purpose and more enlightened future for humankind, even as the world seemed to be crashing down -- perhaps especially then. Excluding "2001: A Space Odyssey," the cinema of Stanley Kubrick is not what you'd call optimistic. His films routinely explore how the folly of obsession leads to our undoing. In one of his earliest films, "The Killing," a band of thieves pull a perfect racetrack heist but then fall prey to personal distractions and betray each other. Later, the obstinate pride of a World War I general in "Paths of Glory" leads to three loyal soldiers' execution for treason. In "Lolita," Vladimir Nabokov's Humbert Humbert ruins his life chasing a teenage nymphet. And, mocking our Cold War nightmares, a series of military blunders bring about nuclear catastrophe in "Dr. Strangelove." In "2001: A Space Odyssey," however, mankind's manic self-destruction is juxtaposed against the species' ultimate survival and evolution. There are plenty of casualties in Kubrick's film, but they do not derail the path of progress. In fact, "2001" asserts that, as Ralph Waldo Emerson once wrote, death "... assumes the aspect of a guide or genius; for it commonly operates revolutions in our way of life." Kubrick's film dares to ask where destiny will take us next, even as he refuses to spell out the answer. Viewed more than 30 years later, when we've recently emerged from an age of exceedingly self-conscious irony, it's clear that while "2001" is full of classically Kubrickian black comedy, it never apologizes for dreaming big. The movie balances a youthfully idealistic sense of inquiry with a wisely restrained manner. The film begins with the famous "Dawn of Man" scene, in which a mysteriously sleek black monolith appears 4 million years before the present day, seemingly to nudge a group of apes into using tools for the first time. The primary use of this new invention, however, is weaponry, forming one of the movie's constant refrains: That which advances us also sets us back. Or vice versa. After killing its rival with a bone, an ape triumphantly tosses the newfound tool into the air, beginning the greatest shot transition in movie history, as the bone turns into a spaceship in the movie's title year. The ship, on its way to a space station orbiting the earth, floats poetically to the tune of "The Blue Danube," one of many instances where Kubrick effectively tells the story with pictures and music instead of words. (This is a 140-minute film with approximately 40 minutes of dialogue.) Or, more accurately, Kubrick uses these devices to let the story unfold, for unlike most Hollywood movies, the music and camera in "2001" never, ever tell you how to feel. Interestingly, the film's initial human protagonist, Dr. Heywood Floyd (William Sylvester), is first seen on the spaceship strapped into his chair asleep, with weightlessness carrying his arm aloft in the same position as the ape's was when it hurled the bone. And indeed, Floyd will soon be part of an identical discovery. Soon we learn that another monolith -- the first evidence of intelligent extraterrestrial life modern man has discovered -- has been "deliberately buried" in Floyd's words, on the moon. The monolith is beaming a radio transmission toward Jupiter as if to say, "go that way," which indeed 18 months later sends astronauts there searching for answers in the "Jupiter Mission" sequence. The voyage to Jupiter aboard the spaceship Discovery (shaped a lot like a bone) is piloted by two humans, Dr. Dave Bowman (Keir Dullea) and Dr. Frank Poole (Gary Lockwood), who, like the rest of the film's characters, show an almost laughable lack of personality. The indication seems to be that we're really not that much more advanced than the apes -- we just have better tools. "Sign O' the Times"Part '80s musical retrospective, part angry social document and all booty-thumping housequake, Prince's 1987 classic stands as pop's last great double album.March 11, 2002 | Little in the world of music is more self-indulgent than the double album. To create one implies an artist has twice as much to say as the majority of performers, what they have to say must be said right then and there and little of it can be understood outside the context of a massive amount of other material. Most double albums -- at least the great ones -- are bound by nothing except their own far-reaching scopes. The subject matter, range of musical styles and grooves on the LP seem to fit together only because nearly everything else under the sun is there too. Such examples aren't hard to think of -- "The Beatles" (aka the White Album), "Exile on Main Street," "Songs in the Key of Life" (perhaps the most thematically consistent double album of them all). And then came Prince, as grand and in love with his own talent as any performer in memory. His first double album, "1999," was a smashing success, a cultural landmark that showed how genius could turn vulgarity into erotica, weirdness into eccentricity, and synthesizers into orchestral weapons. Most striking is the fact that as brilliant as that album was, its most significant achievement was that it laid the groundwork for "Purple Rain." (Songs on that later album such as "I Would Die 4 U" and "Computer Blue" are simply refinements of the styles introduced on "1999.")  In typical purple fashion, the little man sped past us and made two albums for which the world was not fully prepared: "Around the World in a Day" and "Parade." Maybe, if he'd chosen to take us around the world in a week instead of a day, the dizzying psychedelic follow-up to "Purple Rain" could have been digested more easily. And maybe, if "Under the Cherry Moon" hadn't been such a bad movie, the world could have appreciated "Parade" beyond the hit song "Kiss." But when he gave the world time to breathe and catch up, there was a glorious reward for our hard work. That reward was 1987's "Sign O' the Times," the last great double LP and Prince's artistic peak. Sure, "1999" and "Purple Rain" were pop-culture milestones that introduced the masses to the Wonderful World that was Minneapolis and started their own respective crazes, but "Sign O' the Times" was Jamie Starr at his creative and technical best. With this masterwork, Prince combined the styles that had confused casual listeners on "Around the World in a Day" and "Parade," bringing both works together in one deep but totally navigable sea of brilliance. Many Prince-o-philes recognize "Sign O' the Times" as the beginning of the end for popular acceptance of his music, but to say that is to see the glass half-empty. "Sign O' the Times" was one of those albums that made people realize how much potential music had in the dreary artistic landscape of the '80s; all the more amazing was the fact that it was all written, performed and recorded by one man. After three albums with his band, the Revolution, "Sign O' the Times" brought Prince back to the one-man shows that made him famous, but it was much different, in scheme and concept, from "Dirty Mind" and "1999." It was originally titled "The Crystal Ball," a title that would resurface on a collection of outtakes released a decade later, but no psychic could have predicted what was on this album. It has nothing as shocking as "Sister," as vulgar as "Jack U Off" or as explicit as "Head." This was a more mature and refined Prince than the one most had grown accustomed to. Those early albums had no songs as brilliantly crafted as "The Ballad of Dorothy Parker," as soulful as "Adore" or as intelligent as "If I Was Your Girlfriend." The latter stumped the world with a question that may never be answerable: "If I was your one and only friend, would you run to me if somebody hurt you, even if that somebody was me?" To this day, I still can't tell you. I can see the psychosexual genius of the lyric, a juxtaposition of the roles of friend and lover (commonly misunderstood as homosexual) that comes to an electrifying crescendo that demonstrates the lyric "We don't need to make love to have an orgasm." Apparently not.March 12, 2002  |  NEW YORK (AP) -- Now that David Letterman is staying at CBS, ABC's corporate bosses took steps to mend fences with "Nightline" host Ted Koppel on Tuesday. Walt Disney Co. chief executive Michael Eisner phoned Koppel and the two had a "warm, friendly" conversation, according to an ABC employee who spoke on condition of anonymity. On Monday Koppel said ABC's efforts to install Letterman in the time slot held by "Nightline" for 22 years had caused "collateral damage" to the show. And although ABC executives said "Nightline" will stay put, Koppel said he wanted more than "bland assurances or short-term guarantees" about its future. He wanted a clear signal to everyone, including "loyal viewers interested in the robust future of network television news," that Disney was behind his show. The future of "Nightline" is being closely watched among journalists for signals about how news is valued in an era when the major networks are small parts of conglomerates -- ABC in Disney, CBS in Viacom and NBC in General Electric. "If you can take a genuine broadcast news institution that is regarded very, very highly and is profitable and treat it this way, then I think it reflects a value system that bodes very bad things to come for broadcast news," said Alex Jones, director of the Shorenstein Center for Press, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard University. Some in TV news suggest that their most revered institutions -- the evening news broadcasts -- could be in trouble once current anchormen Tom Brokaw, Peter Jennings or Dan Rather step away because of years of declining ratings. Reuven Frank, a retired NBC News president, said the Koppel incident won't necessarily embolden corporate interests to threaten news. "They are very sensitive to bad publicity," he said. ABC executives said "Nightline" would still have a place somewhere on ABC even if Letterman had jumped. They continue to believe they made the right move in going after Letterman. ABC President Alex Wallau said the network's commitment to news was obvious in the days after Sept. 11, and during the round-the-clock millennium coverage. "We think at the end of the day, that support will be recognized," Wallau said. But there were no promises of an unlimited late-night time slot for "Nightline." Disney and ABC officials would not comment publicly on Koppel's statement. Disney President Robert Iger said shortly before Letterman's decision that Disney is interested in distributing "high quality news programs, but also under economic circumstances that make sense to shareholders." The company "would look at a high quality program with superior economics" as an alternative to "Nightline," he said. While he doesn't want to diminish the news division's contributions, Iger said he and Eisner "have to operate with the company as a whole in mind. That often means making decisions that benefit one entity in the company to the detriment of others." ABC News President David Westin wasn't commenting Tuesday. An ABC staff member said that Westin promised, in a phone call to ABC News employees on Tuesday, to work hard to ensure the company fully understands the value of news. Westin also challenged his troops to be bolder and more innovative. Letterman to stay at CBSDavid Letterman put an end to the late-night soap opera that has preoccupied television for more than a week, telling his "Late Show" audience that he is staying at CBS and rejecting an enticing offer from ABC. Letterman's future has been the subject of widespread speculation since reports emerged that ABC was trying to woo him with a multimillion-dollar offer that would have displaced veteran newsman Ted Koppel from his "Nightline" slot. Letterman ended the speculation on Monday -- his first day back after a Caribbean vacation that coincided with the buzz about his future. "I've never been in a situation like this in my life (and) the whole thing has made me dizzy," he said. The fallout from the decision is certain to be felt at ABC, which has repair work to do at its news division. Koppel said that ABC parent Walt Disney Co.'s bid for Letterman had damaged his show. He said it would be unreasonable to expect people at "Nightline" to continue working in a climate of uncertainty. "There must be a great many talented comedians who would welcome the opportunity to take over the `Nightline' time slot," Koppel said. "Our hope is that Disney will send a clear and unmistakable signal to them, to us, to the advertising community and to all of our loyal viewers interested in the robust future of network television news that `Nightline' can count on serious corporate backing." Koppel said "Nightline" deserves "more than bland assurances or a short-term guarantee." ABC President Alex Wallau said "Nightline" will remain in its time slot. But he described the move to go after Letterman as a smart one that fell just short, and said ABC would aggressively try to improve itself as it did with the recent signing of John Madden for "Monday Night Football." Wallau also defended the network's support of its news division in an episode that's been seen as a test case for whether large media companies would stand beside journalists. "We invest a tremendous amount of money to make our news brand and support our people in the news division, and give them the ability to be the best news division that can possibly exist," he said. "We're very proud of that and we think that at the end of the day, that support will be recognized." ABC and CBS dangled similar financial offers to Letterman, deals that would pay him about $31 million a year. The networks were touting the promotional muscle of their parent companies, Viacom for CBS and Disney. CBS promised to be more aggressive promoting Letterman on Viacom's other networks, including MTV, VH1 and TNN. They provide the younger audience Letterman needs to reach his goal of unseating Jay Leno's dominance at NBC's "Tonight" show. A hint of things to come was in the steady stream of Letterman ads on CBS last weekend. The 54-year-old comedian's current contract with CBS expires in August. "We are thrilled that CBS will continue to be the home of David Letterman," CBS President Leslie Moonves said in a statement. "Without question, he is one of the great talents of our time." Although flattered by ABC's attention, Rob Burnett, president of Letterman's production company, Worldwide Pants, said the fact that Letterman "has been here nine years and built a franchise was too much for Dave to walk away from." In his monologue Monday night, Letterman managed to live up to his funny yet prickly reputation -- delivering tough words to ABC, CBS and NBC alike. Not only did he bitterly disappoint ABC executives by rejecting their offer, he compounded the agony by delivering Koppel a ringing endorsement. "He, at the very least, deserves the right to determine his own professional future," Letterman said. "Absolutely no less than that." The veteran talk show host, who has brought CBS a string of Emmy Awards yet burns to beat Leno, said he hopes to end his career at CBS. He said the network was "nothing" when he arrived from NBC in 1993 and has built something. CBS is currently much stronger in prime-time than ABC. Yet Letterman has had a contentious relationship with Moonves, relentlessly ribbing him on his show -- and the CBS executive hasn't always laughed. Letterman said "it's like a family. There's been good times and we've had fistfights." In the future, "the morons running this network think there won't be fistfights," he said. "By God, there will be fistfights and that's too bad." As for NBC, he said the network had "fired" him. Letterman jumped to CBS after NBC decided to anoint Leno as Johnny Carson's "Tonight" show successor, not him. "This is how strange my life has been the last week," Letterman joked. "Earlier today, I got a call from NBC offering me the 'Tonight' show." 