Close WindowBritney gets cyber make overLast Updated: 25 February, 2002 17:38 GMT 	Print This Article LONDON (Reuters) - She was tipped as the new Madonna when she burst onto the music scene four years ago. Now U.S. pop singer Britney Spears is challenging Lara Croft for her cyber-babe crown. Spears has been transformed into a virtual pop princess -- complete with leather catsuit, flowing locks and ample cleavage -- for her first assault on the video games market. Programmers at U.S. games maker THQ Inc. say "Britney's Dance Beat" offers adoring fans the chance to perform with their idol, if only in a virtual world. "Audition to Britney's most popular songs to see if you can keep up with the other dancers," the company says on its website (www.thq.com). "If you're really good, you'll get access to exclusive video and concert footage." Designed with the help of Spears, the game will be available for PlayStation 2 in May. Versions for Game Boy and Xbox will follow later in the year, the company said. LONDON (Reuters) - Gandalf the Wizard has put his money on "The Lord of the Rings" to work its magic at the Oscars next month. And in the lead-up to Hollywood's big night, the Tolkien fantasy scooped a string of glittering prizes while rival Harry Potter was busy winning the battle of the box office. After "The Lord of the Rings: Fellowship of the Ring" landed five British Film Academy Awards, star Ian McKellen firmly backed the fantasy epic to dominate Oscar night. "The received wisdom is that they (Hollywood) never vote a fantasy movie as best film, which gives an added excitement," said McKellen, who plays the wizard in the sweeping three-part epic that cost $270 million to make in New Zealand. "But my money is absolutely on 'Lord of the Rings' because I don't think it looks like a fantasy film, it looks as if it actually happened. That may win them over," he told BBC Television on Monday. McKellen said it was always likely that one of the most renowned literary works of the 20th century -- J.R.R. Tolkien's classic -- would have a ready-made audience. But Director Peter Jackson, whose film has already garnered 13 Oscar nominations, was inevitably taking a risk with impassioned fans of this dark tale of the fight between good and evil played out by hobbits, elves, wizards and orcs. "Of course if they hadn't liked what Peter Jackson had done, if his imagination hand't fitted in with theirs, then we would have problems. "But all is going well -- it opened in Japan and has gone right through the roof. Every single country in the world has taken to it." Making "Lord of the Rings" was a great leap of faith by the producers. Three films were made back-to-back over 18 gruelling months with a cast of 2,400. The next two movies in the trilogy are to open at the end of 2002 and 2003. The big surprise at Sunday night's glittering British awards ceremony was the total eclipse of "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone." LIVERPOOL (Reuters) - Paul McCartney has returned home to Liverpool to make a surprise appearance at a tribute concert for fellow Beatle George Harrison. "I thought I should just come on and say how much George would have loved this," he told the cheering crowd at Sunday night's concert in aid of cancer charities. With the audience joining in, he then launched into an impromptu version of "Yesterday" in memory of Harrison, who died last year of cancer at the age of 58. "It's been a very emotional evening," McCartney said, reflecting fondly on his good times with Harrison, the Quiet Beatle he fondly dubbed "My Baby Brother." "He was a lovely bloke," McCartney told reporters. "He gave a lot to this world -- his music and his spirituality. He was always a very strong man." The tale of the teenage wizard was nominated for eight awards -- but it came away with none. But Harry Potter is at least laughing all the way to the bank. The film has so far earned $926.1 million, making it the second-highest grossing film ever after the romantic blockbuster "Titanic." LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - Will U2 find what it's looking for on Wednesday, when it competes for eight Grammy Awards at the music industry's biggest bash of the year? Or will the Irish rock quartet be rattled by folk musicians, soulful R&B divas and tireless troubadour Bob Dylan? Nothing is ever certain about the Grammys, whose industry voters frequently stun music fans with oddball choices, including last year's album of the year prize to semi-retired jazz-rock recluses Steely Dan. In the past few years the National Academy of Recording Arts & Sciences, which organises the event, has tried to improve the awards' image by forming a top-secret committee to weed out embarrassing choices before they are nominated. This year, the only complaint about the nominations was that there was not too much to complain about. Plenty can go wrong on the night, but leading nominee U2 seems assured of adding some hardware to its collection of 10 Grammys, observers say. "U2 have been around forever and they're seen as a quality band," said Sia Michel, the executive editor of Spin magazine. U2 spent much of 2001 on tour, reapplying for "the best band in the world job," as vocalist Bono said at last year's Grammys where it won three awards for "Beautiful Day," the first single from its album "All That You Can't Leave Behind." It faces competition in the big categories from rookie R&B singers India.Arie 26, and Alicia Keys, 21, with seven and six nods each, respectively. (French classical conductor and composer Pierre Boulez, No. 4 on the all-time winners list with 23 Grammys, also received six nominations.) Bluegrass musician Alison Krauss, R&B singer Brian McKnight and rap duo Outkast received five nominations each. Producer T-Bone Burnett, Canadian pop singer Nelly Furtado, young rock band Train, Aerosmith rocker Steven Tyler and roots-rocker Lucinda Williams each earned four nods. ROOM FOR SURPRISE Michel predicted U2 and Keys would share the major spoils: U2, because people gravitated to the band's socially conscious music following Sept. 11; and Keys, because people are excited that she is a classically trained pianist who writes and produces her own music. But eight-time Grammy-winning producer Phil Ramone warned that there are no certainties. "The mixture is so cool at the top in each category that I'm not sure that anybody's going to walk away with as many Grammys as people think," he said. "Every year the surprise is album of the year for me: ones that you don't think are going to win or don't have a chance suddenly step forward." This year's album race pits U2's "All That You Can't Leave Behind" against India.Arie's "Acoustic Soul," Dylan's "Love and Theft," Outkast's "Stankonia" and the folk/bluegrass-themed movie soundtrack to "O Brother, Where Art Thou?" The producer of the latter album, T-Bone Burnett, considered the U2 release to be the front-runner. "I think we have to be a fairly significant underdog," said Burnett, who was nominated for producer of the year (non-classical) in part for his work on "O Brother." The last time a country album won the album race was in 1969 when Glenn Campbell's "By The Time I Get To Phoenix" beat Jose Feliciano, the Beatles, Richard Harris and Simon & Garfunkel. Still, the "O Brother" soundtrack was "an astounding sleeper hit" with U.S. sales of four million units to date, said Spin's Michel, and could emerge as the dark horse winner. If so, Burnett said it would be "the happiest moment of my life" to share the stage with the album's performers, including 75-year-old banjo picker Ralph Stanley and the members of gospel's Fairfield Four -- consummate musicians who have pursued their craft for decades. "They're worked so hard and they've been marginalised, and yet they've kept the faith and they've kept their vision and they've kept their integrity. It would be a really, really great thing," Burnett said. (The album award goes to the artists, producers and engineers.) KEYS VS. ARIE Grammy voters love sentiment, and nothing warms the heart more than seeing veteran musicians get their belated due, even if it reminds everyone of the academy's oversights over the years. Dylan finally won an album of the year Grammy in 1998 for "Time Out of Mind" and could be an easy choice this year for older voters not in tune with R&B and country. Keys and Arie will compete against each other in six categories, including record and song of the year and best new artist. Michel predicted Arie would lose out because she does not have the same buzz as Keys. Ramone said they both have "magic simplicity" and could end up splitting the vote, allowing a third artist to grab the spotlight. Burnett said he would vote for Furtado as best new artist because she's "spunky." Unfortunately for the coltish 23-year-old singer of song of the year nominee "I'm Like A Bird," Burnett is not a Grammy voter. In fact, he claimed to have never watched a telecast. The other best new artist nominees are pop singer David Gray and California rock band Linkin Park. Ramone said it is "insane" trying to handicap this famously volatile category, whose past winners have included Milli Vanilli, Hootie and the Blowfish and Christopher Cross. The 44th annual Grammy Awards will be held at the Staples Center in downtown Los Angeles. Most of the 101 prizes will be handed out during a fast-paced afternoon ceremony. The main televised ceremony, hosted by comedian Jon Stewart and featuring performances by the likes of U2, Dylan, Keys, Arie, 'N Sync, and some of the "O Brother" artists, will begin at 5 p.m. (1 a.m. British time).  LOS ANGELES (Reuters) - Hollywood agents, already famed for their wheeling and dealing, have sealed a deal that gives them more sway in movies and television production. The agents and the Screen Actors Guild reached an agreement on Monday that allows talent agencies to make investments of up to 20 percent in film and television production, thus easing business rules dating back to 1939 that limited them to only a 10 percent investment. In setting the 20 percent ownership rule, the deal relaxes barriers designed to curb conflicts of interests among agents by preventing them from having too big an ownership interest in companies for which their clients work. For the agencies, the deal gives them greater ability to attract much-needed capital and to compete with rival talent managers in Hollywood who already can represent clients' interests while producing movies and TV shows. Agents hammer out contracts for their clients in specific productions while talent managers guide their clients careers. The agents argued that management companies have a financial advantage because managers can package actors, directors or writers in TV shows they also produce. The proposed deal caps five weeks of intense talks -- and years of wrangling -- between the Screen Actors Guild (SAG) and the Association of Talent Agents/National Association of Talent Representatives (ATA/NATRA). Besides allowing talent agencies to buy up to 20 percent of an independent movie or TV production company, the agency can sell up to 20 percent of their companies to producers, SAG officials said in outlining the deal to reporters. AMENDS 1939 AGREEMENT But the pact forbids movie studios, television networks or their affiliates from holding a stake in talent agencies. The agreement also allows talent agencies to acquire up to 20 percent of an advertising agency and gives certain ad agencies the right to own up to 20 percent of a talent agency. All ownership interests between talent agencies and production companies and advertising firms would be fully disclosed. The three-year deal, which amends the 1939 "master franchise agreement" between actors and talent agents, must now be approved by SAG's board of directors and the union's 98,000 members by referendum. It also must be ratified by talent agencies. The SAG board meets March 11. Tom LaGrua, chairman of the SAG negotiating team, predicted rank-and-file would accept the agreement. "This agreement is a win-win for actors," he said. "It empowers actors with the essential information needed to choose the kind of franchised agent who works best for them." LaGrua added, "While our proposed agreement will allow for some industry investments by or in our agents, those investments will represent minority and non-controlling interests, meaning the character of the actor-agent relationship is not going to change." Negotiators for ATA/NATRA had wanted even broader ownership rules, but settled for the 20 percent. Talent agents made several concessions including contributions to a new $1 million "bond" fund to protect actors in the event of bankruptcy or default by talent agencies, which can collect paychecks from producers on behalf of performers. In addition, the accord would establish an Actor Benefit Fund for contributions from agents to SAG's health plan. The agencies also pledged their cooperation in enforcing SAG rules governing work on non-union projects made in countries where SAG has no jurisdiction. This last issue is a key point for SAG as many film and television companies are increasingly moving their productions outside the United States where labour costs are often lower. Ali G to edit men's magazineLast Updated: 25 February, 2002 13:26 GMT 	Print This Article LONDON (Reuters) - Comedian Ali G has traded rapping for writing by guest editing a leading men's magazine. The spoof "gangsta" rapper, who came under fire last week for swearing on BBC Radio 1, has written the editor's foreword for the April edition of Esquire. Ali G, real name Sacha Baron Cohen, also appears on the cover as he promotes his big screen film debut "Ali G in da House". "He is fantastically popular, brilliantly funny and we think he will really appeal to our readers," an Esquire spokeswoman said. Esquire's editor Peter Howarth kept control of the magazine's content but listened to Ali G's ideas. Details of the editorial have yet to be released, but it is expected to focus on Ali G's twin obsessions, drugs and sex. Esquire, published by the National Magazine Company, said it was part of a year-old campaign to distance the magazine from so-called "lads' mags" which normally splash a semi-naked woman across the cover. "We found that advertisers said they didn't want to be associated with that," Esquire said. "We've lost a lot of readers who frankly would have been better off buying top shelf stuff or going back to the lads' mags." Baron Cohen launched his foul-mouthed character on the British public on Channel 4 in the late 1990s. He made his name with spoof interviews in which he sent up politicians and public figures by asking them naive questions. Ali G went on to appear in the video for Madonna's "Music" and hosted the MTV European Music Awards in Frankfurt last November. The comedian came under fire last week after swearing live on Sarah Cox's BBC Radio 1 breakfast show. Bookies bet Pop Idol will reign for monthsLast Updated: 25 February, 2002 15:47 GMT 	Print This Article LONDON (Reuters) - London bookies are offering odds of 8-1 that Pop Idol winner Will Young will rocket to number one with his first single -- and stay there. "Punters think Will's first single will be huge and are backing him to monopolise the charts for two months or more," said William Hill. It also offered 20-1 odds that Young would win a Brit Award next year and 8-1 he would hold the Christmas number one position in 2002. The 23-year-old former politics student fought off 10,000 wannabe superstars to win the compulsively watchable "Pop Idol" television series this month. Advance orders for his Double A-side -- "Evergreen" and "Anything is Possible" -- have already reached 1.2 million. Kylie named best pop act in NME awardsLast Updated: 25 February, 2002 17:45 GMT 	Print This Article LONDON (Reuters) - Australian pop princess Kylie Minogue has swept aside Madonna and Britney Spears to be named the best pop act of 2002 at a London awards ceremony. The petite 33-year-old star won the prize at the annual NME Carling Awards on Monday, adding to the two gongs she picked up at last week's Brits, the "Oscars" of the British music business. But her success was eclipsed by much-hyped newcomers The Strokes, who won three awards, including best band. Billed by some as the future of rock and roll, the new York City quintet have attracted celebrity fans with their distinctive 1970s sound. The Strokes won the best newcomers award and best album for "Is This It", beating "Wonderland" by indie band The Charlatans, Radiohead's "Amnesiac", heavy metal band Slipknot's "Iowa" and "Origins of Symmetry" by indie group Muse. The best single award went to Northern Irish indie band Ash and their hit "Burn Baby Burn". They beat Damon Albarn's band Gorillaz with "Clint Eastwood", Kylie Minogue's "Can't Get You Out Of My Head", The Strokes's "Hard to Explain" and "Bohemian Like You" by U.S. band the Dandy Warhols. Former Stone Roses frontman Ian Brown won the best solo artist award, beating British singer-songwriter PJ Harvey, Kylie Minogue, Californian heavy metal star Andrew WK and U.S. folk rocker Ryan Adams. There was good news for Irish supergroup U2 who won the NME award for best live act, after failing to be nominated for any Brits. The late singer Aaliyah was named best R&B act more than six months after she died in a plane crash in the Bahamas. Rap artist Missy Elliott, who scored a hit last year with "Get Ur Freak On", beat controversial rapper Eminem and Bubba Sparxx to win the best hip hop act award. Welsh newcomers The Lostprophets were named best heavy metal act and Radiohead's "Pyramid Song" won the award for best music video. 